adoni
History[edit]
history[edit]
the adoni fort is central to the town's history. in 1780, an observer wrote,
"adoni is situated upon three mountains which are united; it has a range of irregular fortifications, piled one over the other. to maintain it requires a garrison of 30,000 men. the fortifications upon the mountains are often weak...to the south of adoni, a large plain, to the north there are mountains, obnoxious from their nearness, to the east there are other mountains. to the west there are also mountains and this part is the weakest."
it is thought to have been founded by chandra sen in 1200 bc and later came into the medieval kingdom of vijayanagar which flourished from the 14th to the 16th centuries. the fort then became the stronghold of the muslim kings of the adil shahi dynasty of bijapur and golconda. in 1690 the fort was taken by aurangzeb then in the late 18th century it came to the raja of mysore, tipu sultan before it was ceded to the british in 1799. in the 15th century and early to mid 16th century, adoni was a fort town of the vijayanagara empire. it was controlled by the kinsmen of aliya rama raya, a powerful aristocrat of the vijayanagara.
in 1558, during the decline of the vijayanagara empire, control of adoni came to ali adil shah i (1558–1579), the fifth sultan of the bijapur sultanate. hamilton, in 1820, stated,
"it [adoni at this time] stood at the top of a high hill, and contained within its walls many tanks and fountains of pure water with numerous princely structures."
in 1564, the sultanate of bijapur lost control of adoni to mohammedan rulers.
from 1678 to 1688, rule of adoni lay with siddi masud, a wealthy habshi (african) from abyssinia who was a powerful general of raja anup singh of bikaner, siddi masud improved the fort; cleared the surrounding forest; established the townships of imatiazgadh and adilabad and constructed the shahi jamia masjid. siddi masud was also an avid art collector and a patron of the kurnool school of painting. in 1688, adoni was attacked by firuz jang, a mughal general. siddi musud surrendered with his courtiers and family.
at the fall of the mughal empire, around 1760, adoni was ruled by governors appointed by the nizam of hyderabad, a mughal splinter clan. one such governor was salabat jung, brother of the nizam. the french supported the appointment. however,
"salabat jung was very mild by disposition and neither bussy nor dupleix rated his intelligence highly. in fact, dupleix went to the extent of cal ling him a duffer."
in 1786, adoni was besieged for one month and then captured by tipu sultan of the kingdom of mysore of south india. on 4 may 1799, tipu sultan died at the hands of the english. on 15 june 1800, arthur wellesley, marquess of wellington, wrote to the resident at hyderabad about appropriate reparations to the nizam for english occupation of adoni. adoni became one of twenty taluqs and in 1810, the adoni and nagaldinna taluqs were combined. in 1817 adoni, at the beginning of the third anglo-maratha war, the british raised a new battalion from other nearby regiments. by 1842, the military had left adoni because of the perception that the area was susceptible to cholera and because of the unfavourable rugged surrounding geography. under british rule, south india was divided into several administrative districts. adoni fell into the district of bellary of madras presidency. on 29 april 1861, the acting district engineer of kurnool wrote to the chief secretary to government at fort st george,
"north and by east of bellary, on the hyderabad road, the only important town is adoni; it contains a very large population of mussulmen, and is a place of considerable trade and manufacture."
in 1867, the adoni and the bellary municipal councils were created. between 1876 and 1878, a severe el nino famine affected adoni and the surrounding areas where nearly one third of the population died. in 1953, after the linguistic reorganisation of the states, adoni gained its present seat as part of andhra pradesh.
