agartala
Politics[edit]
politics[edit]
on 1 november 1956, tripura became a union territory and an advisory committee was formed to advise the chief commissioner. on 15 august 1957, a territorial council was formed with 30 elected members and two members nominated by the government of india. on 1 july 1963, the tripura territorial council was dissolved and a legislative assembly with the existing members of the territorial council was formed. tripura is governed through a parliamentary system of representative democracy, a feature it shares with other indian states. universal suffrage is granted to residents. the tripura government has three branches: executive, legislature and judiciary. the tripura legislative assembly consists of elected members and special office bearers that are elected by the members. assembly meetings are presided over by the speaker, or by the deputy speaker in the case of the speaker's absence. the assembly is unicameral with 60 members of the legislative assembly (mla). agartala assembly constituency is part of tripura west. political clashes between the communist party of india (marxist) and indian national congress have always been common.
after the independence of india in 1947 tripura was still a princely state. after the death of the last king maharaja bir bikram kishore manikya bahadur on 17 may 1947, a regency council was formed headed by maharani kanchan prava devi, for aid of the minor prince, kirit bikram kishore manikya bahadur. the regent signed the merger agreement with the government of india. after the merger tripura became a part 'c' state. on reorganisation of the states, effected in november 1956, tripura became a union territory with an advisory committee to aid and advise the chief commissioner. tripura gained its statehood on 21 january 1972 before that but merging with india in 1949 the first chief minister of the state was on 1 july 1963, sachindra lal singh of the indian national congress, he was the cm of the state for around 3,046 days. from 5 january 1978 the rule of the congress came to an end as nripen chakraborty became the first communist chief minister of tripura. later again the communists fell and the inc rose and was in power till 1992, from 1993 again cpi (m) came to power. manik sarkar was the cm of the state from 11 march 1998 to march 2018. in 2018 tripura legislative assembly election bjp 36 out of 59 seats, defeating cpi(m) in the process. bjp's biplab kumar deb was sworn in as the chief minister of tripura.
agartala is administered by several government agencies. the agartala municipal corporation, or amc, oversees and manages the civic infrastructure of the city which together encompass 49 wards. each ward elects a councillor to the amc. each borough has a committee of councillors, each of whom is elected to represent a ward. by means of the borough committees, the corporation undertakes urban planning and maintains roads, government-aided schools, hospitals, and municipal markets.
