agartala
Education[edit]
education[edit]
this article reads like a directory. wikipedia policy generally considers directories in articles to be unencyclopedic and potential spam. please improve this article to conform to a higher standard of quality, and to make it neutral in tone. if it cannot be properly modified, the article is likely to be merged, redirected, or deleted. (march 2019) (learn how and when to remove this template message)

universities[edit]
icfai university, tripura
tripura university is agartala's central university, located in a 10 km range from the city of agartala. other universities include the icfai university, which was established in 2004 and is ranked 2nd in the engineering colleges of india. the maharaja bir bikram university is known as the only state university within tripura. the sikkim manipal university has been ranked 13th in india's best medical universities by india today as well as being in the top 10 emerging colleges of india.
colleges[edit]
there are currently 15 general colleges within argatala including the bir bikram memorial college, the ramthakur college and the women's college, agartala which was established in 1965 and is the only existing college for women within the capital city.
areial view of national institute of technology, agartala
the entrance gate to the new campus of tripura institute of technology
colleges with a specific academic focus within argatala include the tripura government law college which provides a five year bachelor of law degree for its students. argatala is also home to numerous technical colleges including the national institute of technology, agartala and the tripura institute of technology.
prominent schools[edit]
the prominent primary and secondary schools of agartala include the st paul's school, agartala which has an aim to teach students who are apart of the christian faith. a similar school, the holy cross school, was established by the congregation of holy cross. other prominent schools include the shishu bihar h.s. school and the netaji subhash vidyaniketan.
