agartala
Localities[edit]
localities[edit]
agartala city consists of many paras, which means "locality" in bengali. each collection of neighbourhoods or para is usually also a municipal ward or division. there are 49 wards under the municipal corporation jurisdiction.
agartala town hall
big bazaar, ml plaza
ujjayanta market used to be known as indira book market and tulsibati market.
banamalipur is an important business centre and a part of urban agartala, which falls under the agartala post office.  dhaleswar is a locality in the state close to banamalipur, under the east police station and dhaleswar post office.
pratapgar, math chowmuhani, kashari patti, and ker chowmuhani are some important places in the city. one of the largest banyan trees is located in ker chowmuhani. under that tree lies the shiv-kali temple of ker chowmuhani. this is one of the most peaceful temples in agartala. in local language chowmuhani is an intersection of three or four roads, i.e., a place where a couple of roads are linked up across a particular point; in pure bengali chowmuhani is called "more".
kaman chowmuhani is the most important place and a part of the heart of the city. the name kaman chowmuhani is derived from the bengali word kaman meaning "cannon" in english. it so happened when the king of tripura dhanya manikya defeated the soldiers of husain shah in battle and forfeited their cannon which was later set up in this place from where its name is derived. the place along with its object is a unique icon of agartala.
krishnanagar is one of the most densely populated parts of the city. it encompasses  the most visited temples of agartala like jagannnatha temple, laxminarayana temple, durgabari temple and alpkhbaba temple. radha nagar has a bus stand and it connects buses and other vehicles to the northern part of the state.
shibnagar is another locality which connects the city to maharaja bir bikram college, the oldest college of the state whereas ramnagar is the most dense locality in tripura. the rectangular gridiron network of ramnagar dates from the eras of the rajas, one of the earliest planned neighbourhood in the city. there are 12 divisions in this area and many clubs which organise durga puja. joynagar is another a locality in agartala which has six lanes. there are four clubs which organise durga puja. the closest landmark of joynager is battala market, one of the important business hubs in the state.
abhoynagar and arundhutinagar are two residential areas around the city and are densely populated, (arundhutinagar) being located 5 km away from the city centre confining the railway station of the capital city.
gol bazar (maharajganj bazar) is the most important business hub as well as the largest market in the state of tripura. products are exported to many indian cities from this zone. the market was established by the king of tripura before india's independence.
gurkha basti is one of the biggest slum areas in the city, a recent campaign has been launched by the state government to make the city slum free and hence relocation of its residents is underway. kunjaban is a census town in west tripura district, which mainly includes government buildings and localities. the secretariat and the seat of the state government is located in this area. new capital complex is located in kunjaban and is a planned and modern area. the secretariat and the state assembly along with the new governor house is located here.
college tilla consists of the historic maharaja bir bikram college which was set up by maharaja bir bikram kishore manikya in 1947. it is surrounded by some localities and quarter complexes of many government employees.
mbb club, indranagar, bholagiri and bhati abhoynagar are some residential places in the city.
79 tilla is another important part of agartala with major offices such as the bsnl office, electric office, geological survey office and quarters, and the ag quarters. it is located 2.5 km approx from the heart of the city.
gb bazar is another important market of this state which is located 2 km from the heart of the city. the agartala government medical college is located here.
amtali, badhar ghat, college tilla, jagaharimura, lake chowmuhani, advisor chowmuhani, ganaraj chowmuhani, durjoynagar, bardowali are some important places in the city.
battala is the commercial area of the city, it is often called bottala in bengali and is also known as the electronics market of agartala. products are imported from surrounding countries and the cheapest variety of cloths and accessories are found. battala also has a strong food market and is the second biggest market in tripura after gol bazar.
melarmath is one of the most important parts of the city and also the electronic business hub centre; the city center market as well as other prominent structures are located here. melarmath kali bari temple is one of the widely known temples of agartala.
khayerpur and chandrapur are located on the national highway 8.
these areas are subdivided into residential blocks, such as banamalipur which is divided into north banamalipur, madhya banamlipur, south banamalipur, etc.
from 2004 the agartala municipal council has been further extended, taking 16 villages of dukli r. d. block, seven villages of mohanpur r. d. block and two villages of jirania r. d. block with area of 43 km and 178,495 population in addition to the 16 km and population of 200,000 in the 2001 census.
