agartala
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
airport[edit]
maharaja bir bikram airport terminal
interior of airport
agartala is connected to other cities in india by air via maharaja bir bikram airport. there are direct flight connections to kolkata, imphal, guwahati, bangalore and new delhi. as per aai report, agartala airport is the third international airport in northeast india. the airport was built in 1942 by bir bikram kishore manikya debbarma bahadur who was the ruler of tripura state until 1947, and used to be called "singerbhil airport"; the indian ministry of civil aviation renamed the airport in 2018.  during world war ii, us 4th combat cargo group flew curtiss c-46 from the airport to fly supplies over burma.   the airport is located in singerbhil 20 km (12 mi) north of agartala. the major airlines are air india, indigo. the airport is under construction to make it an international airport.
plans passed to upgrade the airport building with a new terminal under construction and better facilities and modern equipment along with more apron, expansion of runways, better cat and navigation system.
roads[edit]
national highway 8 connects agartala to assam and the rest of india by road, also known as the lifeline of tripura. the highways (nh44, nh 44a) connect agartala with silchar (317 km), guwahati (599 km), shillong (499 km), dharmanagar (200 km) and aizawl (443 km). a bus service connects it to dhaka (150 km).
national highway 44 (india) –  connected to tripura to shillong and mizoram (nh 44a) national highway 44a (india) –  connected to tripura to mizoram
agartala is well connected by road to other parts of tripura state. national highway 44 has been extended to the south, thus improving the road connectivity between agartala and south tripura. buses, jeeps, trekkers and suvs are the most common public carriers, and cars and vans are usually used for private hire. the highway passes through hilly terrains, while travelling from the city towards the north one can experience the lavishing and lush green baramura hill range, atharamura hills and the longtharai hills and while moving towards the south debatamura hills can be seen.
the main mode of public transportation within the city consists of a network of cycle rickshaws, auto rickshaws and buses. to ease traffic congestion a 2.26 km long flyover is constructed.
railways[edit]
since 2008, agartala has been connected to other cities in india by the agartala railway station situated at  dukli. the foundation stone for the 119-km kumarghat-agartala railway project was laid in 1996 by former prime minister h. d. deve gowda.
agartala railway station
a passenger train at agartala railway station
agartala is the second capital city (after guwahati, assam) in the northeast which is connected to the country's railway network. the railway station is located approximately 5.5 km (2.96 nautical miles) from the heart of the city and a lot of modes of transportation are available to reach the city from the station.
broad-gauge conversion work in the lumding-silchar segment was completed in march 2015. gauge conversion work up to agartala was completed by the end of march 2016, and railway traffic between agartala and silchar began. during the laying of rail lines from kumarghat to agartala, provisions were kept for swiftly converting it to broad gauge. presently, local trains from agartala to dharmanagar and silchar are functional. work on express trains connecting agartala to delhi, kolkata, guwahati and dibrugarh has started. local railway traffic between agartala to sabroom has become functional.
connecting with tripura train rajdhani, shatabdi, janshatabdi, garib rath, duronto, yuva, ac trains. a rail link between agartala and akhaura in bangladesh was approved by the government of india in september 2011. ircon is constructing this 15 km long track that will directly connect northeast india to chittagong international sea port. the tripurasundari express and rajdhani express are two super fast weekly trains connecting agartala to anand vihar terminal, delhi. other trains like deoghar express (weekly), kanchanjungha express to sealdah runs four days a week, agartala-habibganj weekly special train and bengaluru bound bi-weekly humsafar express connects the city to the states of assam, west bengal, bihar, jharkhand, madhya pradesh, uttar pradesh, odisha, andhra pradesh, tamil nadu and karnataka.
