agartala
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (december 2019) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
places of interest[edit]
ujjayanta palace
college tilla –  maharaja bir bikram college, tripura university buildings, football ground, international cricket stadium, picturesque lush landscapes and serene natural lakes. it is also a national bird sanctuary. ujjayanta palace –  palace of the tripura kings, was converted to state legislative assembly and now into a museum, situated in the area of palace compound is one of the eye catching attraction in the state. it is a former royal palace in agartala, and also served as the meeting place of the tripura legislative assembly until 2011. the area has decoded from the ruling landmark of the kings to the citizens. tours are conducted by the tripura tourism department. the name ujjayanta palace was given by the poet rabindranath tagore, who visited the state of tripura many times. maharaja bir bikram was the last king of tripura and the last king who stayed in his house in the palace. it has now been transformed into a museum named ujjayanta museum and it was inaugurated by dr.hamid ansari, the former vice president of india agartala jagannath mandir — hindu temple of the vaishnava school of thought.
parks and playgrounds[edit]
main gate of heritage park
heritage park: the most visited of all the parks in the city, the most notable features here are the miniature models of various monuments of the state, the ayurvedic herb-garden and the fountain. rabindra kanan: a park in the vicinity of the pushpavanta palace, former raj bhavan of tripura and the malancha nivas, this park annually holds the birth anniversary ceremony of rabindranath tagore, after whom the park is named. it is near to heritage park. vivek uddyan: adjacent to ujjayanta palace and children's park, this park annually holds the birth anniversary ceremony of swami vivekananda, after whom the park is named nehru park: a stroll or walking park that is decorated in greenery with rivers (no mechanical themed-machinery), close in driving distance from heritage park and rabindra kanan. children's park albert ekka park lembucherra park: the latest addition to agartala's parks
museums[edit]
tripura state museum
tripura state museum, located at the ujjayanta palace science museum, located in sukanta academy haveli museum, located in khayerpur
multiplexes[edit]
rupasi multiplex: one of the established multi-screen cinemas in agartala is the rupasi cinema, ml plaza, agartala. balaka cinema: located in the city center agartala.
