agra
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (april 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
air[edit]
as of april 2021, indigo operates regular flights between agra airport and mumbai, ahmedabad, bhopal and bengaluru. the agra airport at kheria is controlled by the indian air force.
rail[edit]

main article: railways in agra
agra cantt railway station
railway map of agra (the line to jaipur has meanwhile been converted to broad gauge)
the city of agra is served by 7 railway stations viz. agra cant.(major station for delhi - mumbai line), raja-ki-mandi, agra fort(major station for jodhpur- hawrah line), idgah, agra city, jamuna bridge and billochpura. agra city comes under the jurisdiction of agra division of north central railways zone of the indian railways. agra is served by multiple mail/express trains, as well as rajdhani, shatabdi and gatiman express. the gatiman express is india's first semi-high train speed service, which cut travel time between agra and delhi to 100 minutes. being a major tourist destination, agra is also served by the luxury train maharajas' express.
agra cantt. railway station
road[edit]
inner ring road link yamuna expressway to lucknow expessway, fatehabad road, shamshabad road, nh-3, nh-11 agra
inter-state bus terminal (i.s.b.t.), idgah bus stand, taj depot and fort depot are the major bus stands in agra, connecting agra to most of the bigger cities in northern india. it is a major junction of highways with three national highways and two expressways (yamuna expressway & agra lucknow expressway) originating from agra.
from delhi: nh 19 (old number: nh 2), a modern divided highway, connects the 200 km (124 mi) distance from delhi to agra. from delhi / noida: yamuna expressway, a modern access controlled highway connects the 200 km (124 mi) distance from delhi to agra. yamuna expressway (formerly taj expressway) is a six lane, 165 km (103 mi) long, controlled-access expressway, that connects new delhi with agra via greater noida and mathura in the indian state of uttar pradesh. nh 509 (old number: nh 93) connects agra to moradabad via aligarh. section of nh 44 (old number: nh 3 agra mumbai national highway) connects agra to gwalior via dholpur. nh 21 (old number: nh 11 agra jaipur highway) connects jaipur to bareilly via agra. agra lucknow expressway is a six lane, 302 km (188 mi) long, controlled-access expressway, that connects lucknow with agra via kannauj and etawah in the indian state of uttar pradesh.
bus services are run by the upsrtc([1] other para-transit modes include rickshaws. polluting vehicles are not allowed near the taj mahal. within the city, mahatma gandhi marg is the main artery.
agra metro[edit]

main article: agra metro
rail india technical and economic service (rites) had proposed 30 stations, 11 underground and 19 elevated, for two corridors of the metro rail in the city. the two lines are sikandra to the taj mahal's east gate via agra fort and agra cantt to kalindi vihar. on 24 march 2017, state chief minister yogi aditya nath approved the project. in december 2017, the cabinet of the up government approved the dpr as per new metro policy. prime minister narendra modi laid the foundation stone of agra metro on 8 march 2019.
