agra
Education[edit]
education[edit]
agra university
st john college
st peter's college

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (april 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
it was during the advent of the mughal era that agra grew as a centre of islamic education. in the year 1823, agra college, one of the oldest colleges in india was formed out of a sanskrit school established by the scindia rulers. in the british era, agra became a great centre of hindi literature with people like babu gulab rai at the helm.
universities and colleges[edit]
agra college
agra university was established on 1 july 1927 and catered to colleges spread across the united provinces, the rajputana, the central provinces and almost to entire northern india. there are 10 institutes comprising various departments and around 700 colleges are affiliated to this university. the historic agra university was later rechristened as dr. bhimrao ambedkar university by the then chief minister of uttar pradesh, mayawati.
the institute of mental health and hospital, formerly known as agra lunatic asylum, was established in september 1859 governed by the state of uttar pradesh. it is spread over an extensive and beautiful ground of 172.8 acres (69.9 ha) land and is well-known centre for the treatment, training, and research on mental disorders in northern india. the institute was renamed as mental hospital, agra in 1925. presently all admissions and discharges are being done under the provisions of mental health act, 1987. central institute of hindi, (also known as kendriya hindi sansthan) is an autonomous institute under ministry of human resource development, government of india engaged in teaching hindi as a foreign and second language. apart from running residential hindi language courses for foreign students, the institute also conducts regular training programmes for teachers of hindi belonging to non-hindi states of india. the institute is situated at an 11 acres (4.5 ha) campus on the outskirts of agra city. headquartered in agra the institute has eight regional centres in delhi, hyderabad, mysore, shillong, dimapur, guwahati, ahmedabad and bhubneshwar. the institute is the only government-run institution in india established solely for research and teaching of hindi as a foreign and second language. sarojini naidu medical college, is one of the three oldest medical colleges of india. it is located in agra, uttar pradesh state. it is named after the first lady governess of uttar pradesh, poet and freedom fighter, bharat kokila smt. sarojini naidu. agra college, is one of the oldest institutions in india. pandit gangadhar shastri, a noted sanskrit scholar founded the college in 1823. till 1883 the institute was a government college and after that, a board of trustees and a committee of management managed the college. agra college produced the first graduate in uttar pradesh and the first law graduate to northern india. st. john's college, agra, is a college established in 1850, now part of the dr. bhim rao ambedkar university, earlier known as agra university. it is amongst the oldest and one of the most beautiful christian colleges in india. the college runs a study centre of indira gandhi national open university, a central university. raja balwant singh college, established in 1885 owes its existence to raja balwant singh ji of awagarh who enabled the institution to grow as one of the oldest and biggest colleges of uttar pradesh. raja balwant singh college is located at bichpuri, agra, uttar pradesh, india. the college is affiliated to uttar pradesh technical university, lucknow, and dr. b.r. ambedkar university, agra. dayalbagh educational institute, radha soami satsang sabha, started the radhasoami educational institute, as a co-educational middle school, open to all, on 1 january 1917. it became a degree college in 1947, affiliated to agra university. in 1975, it formulated a programme of undergraduate studies which received approbation from the government of uttar pradesh and the university grants commission, as a result of which in 1981 the ministry of education, government of india, conferred the status of an institution deemed to be a university on the dayalbagh educational institute, to implement the new scheme.
schools[edit]
st. clare's senior secondary school, agra was established in 1957 by the archbishop of agra dominic athaide primarily to cater for the educational needs of children. it is a convent school and is managed by catholic archdiocese of agra. it is affiliated to central board of secondary education (cbse) and runs classes from i to xii. st. george's college, agra is one of the oldest convent schools in india. it is a minority anglo-indian christian institution granted minority rights under article 30 of the indian constitution. it is located near mall road and near to targhar. st. paul's college, agra was established on 25 january 1980 by the church of north india and is affiliated to the council for the indian school certificate examinations board of schools. st. peter's college, agra, founded in the year 1846, it is one of the oldest convent schools in india. it is a roman catholic institution granted minority rights under article 30 of the indian constitution
