agra
Monuments and architecture[edit]
monuments and architecture[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (april 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
taj mahal[edit]

main article: taj mahal

the taj mahal rises above the banks of the river like a solitary tear suspended on the cheek of time.— rabindranath tagore, (translated by kshitish roy) from one hundred and one poems by rabindranath tagore (pp. 95-96)
taj mahal is mausoleum complex in agra, built by the mughal emperor shah jahan as a tomb for his wife mumtaz mahal ("chosen one of the palace"), who died in childbirth in 1631, having been the emperor's inseparable companion since their marriage in 1612. india's most famed building, it is situated in the eastern part of the city on the southern (right) bank of the yamuna river, about 1.6 km east of the agra fort, also on the right bank of the yamuna. the taj mahal is distinguished as the finest example of mughal architecture, a blend of indian, persian, and islamic styles. other attractions include twin mosque buildings (placed symmetrically on either side of the mausoleum), pleasant gardens, and a museum. the complex was designated a unesco world heritage site in 1983, and is one of the new seven wonders of the world. the taj mahal is the most visited tourist spot in the india, attracting nearly 6.9 million visitors in 2018–19.
the chief architect was probably the persian architect ustad ahmad lahori. designed as a unified entity according to the principles of mughal architecture, the five principal elements of the complex were the main gateway, garden, mosque, jawab (literally 'answer', a building mirroring the mosque), and the mausoleum, with its four minarets. the construction commenced in 1632 with upwards of twenty thousand workers from india, persia, the ottoman empire, and europe working to complete the mausoleum itself by 1639, the adjunct buildings by 1643, with decoration work continuing until at least 1647. in total, construction of the 42 acre (17 hectare) complex spanned 22 years.
it can be observed from agra fort from where emperor shah jahan gazed at it for the last eight years of his life, a prisoner of his son aurangzeb. verses of the quran are inscribed on it and at the top of the gate are 22 small domes, signifying the number of years the monument took to build. the taj mahal was built on a marble platform that stands above a sandstone one. the most elegant and largest dome of the taj mahal has a diameter of 60 feet (18 m), and has a height of 80 feet (24 m); directly under this dome is the tomb of mumtaz mahal. shah jahan's tomb was erected next to hers by his son aurangzeb. the interiors are decorated with fine pietra dura inlay work, incorporating semi-precious stones.
however, air pollution caused by emissions from foundries and other nearby factories and exhaust from motor vehicles has damaged the taj, notably its marble facade. a number of measures have been taken to reduce the threat to the monument, among them the closing of some foundries and the installation of pollution-control equipment at others, the creation of a parkland buffer zone around the complex, and the banning of nearby vehicular traffic, and more recently, use of 'mud pack' therapy. perhaps most importantly, the 10,400 km (4,000 sq mi) taj trapezium zone has been created around the taj mahal and other nearby monuments where strict pollution restrictions are in place on industries, following a 1996 supreme court of india ruling.
some antique views were published in the fisher's drawing room scrap books, namely  tâj-mahal, agra. by samuel prout from a mid-distant angle (1832) and  ruins about the taj mahal. by s. austin from those said ruins (1836). both are accompanied by poetical illustrations by letitia elizabeth landon.
the most common front view of the taj mahal       taj mahal and outlying buildings as seen from across the yamuna river (northern view)       tombs of shah jahan and his beloved wife, mumtaz mahal       taj mahal from agra fort
agra fort[edit]

main article: agra fort
the agra fort is a large 16th-century fortress of red sandstone located by the yamuna river in agra. it was first established by the mughal emperor akbar and served as the seat of royal government when agra was the capital of the mughal empire in addition to being a military base and a royal residence. built on the site of earlier fortifications by islam shah suri(son of sher shah suri), the agra fort lies on the right bank of the yamuna river and is connected to the taj mahal (downstream, around a bend in the yamuna), by a stretch of parkland. the fort was commissioned by akbar in 1565, taking around eight years to build. though much of the structure of the fort was founded by akbar, both the interior and exterior underwent considerable changes under his son jahangir and grandson shah jahan, who added many new structures, often of marble. the red sandstone walls of the roughly semi-circular structure have a perimeter of about 2.5 km, rise 21 meters high, and are surrounded by a moat. there are two entrances in the walls: the delhi gate facing west, the original entrance, situated nearly opposite to the agra fort railway station and jama masjid, and decorated with intricate marble inlays; and the amar singh gate(also known as hathi pol, or elephant gate) facing south, presently the only means in or out of the fort complex). the complex of buildings in the fort—reminiscent of persian and timurid architecture, with great inspiration from jain and hindu architecture—forms a city within a city.
among the major attractions in the fort is jahangiri mahal, the largest residence in the complex, built by akbar as a private palace for his rajput wives. in the diwan-i-am (hall of public audience), the emperor would listen to public petitions and meet state officials. the diwan-i-khas (hall of private audience) was used for receiving distinguished visitors. the famous peacock throne was once kept there, before aurangzeb took it to delhi. near the diwan-i-khas stands the musamman burj, an octagonal tower which was the residence of shah jahan's favourite empress, mumtaz maḥal. the moti masjid (pearl mosque), constructed by shah jahan, is a structure made entirely of white marble. the emperor's private residence was the khas mahal, whose marble walls were once adorned with flowers depicted by precious gems. located to its northeast is the sheesh mahal (palace of mirrors), its walls and ceilings inlaid with thousands of small mirrors. numerous other structures are there in the complex, including the anguri bagh, the mina bazaar etc.
in addition to its other functions, the fort also served as a prison for shah jahan when aurangzeb, his son and successor as emperor, had him confined there from 1658 until his death in 1666.
the jahangiri mahal, the largest residence in the complex       musamman burj, an octagonal tower which was the residence of shah jahan's favourite empress, mumtaz maḥal       the moti masjid or the pearl mosque       amar singh gate, one of two entrances into agra's red fort
itmad-ud-daulah's tomb[edit]

main article: itmad-ud-daulah's tomb
the itmad-ud-daulah's tomb
nur jahan commissioned itmad-ud-daulah's tomb, sometimes called the "baby taj", for her father, mirza ghiyas beg, the chief minister of the emperor jahangir. located on the left bank of the yamuna river, the mausoleum is set in a large cruciform garden, crisscrossed by water courses and walkways. the area of the mausoleum itself is about 23 m (250 sq ft), and is built on a base that is about 50 m (540 sq ft) and about one metre (3.3 feet) high. on each corner are hexagonal towers, about thirteen metres (43 feet) tall. small in comparison to many other mughal-era tombs, it is sometimes described as a jewel box. its garden layout and use of white marble, pietra dura, inlay designs, and latticework presage many elements of the taj mahal.
the walls are white marble from rajasthan encrusted with semi-precious stone decorations – cornelian, jasper, lapis lazuli, onyx, and topaz in images of cypress trees and wine bottles or more elaborate decorations like cut fruit or vases containing bouquets. light penetrates the interior through delicate jali screens of intricately carved white marble.
akbar's tomb, sikandra[edit]

main article: tomb of akbar the great
tomb of akbar the great
sikandra, the last resting place of the mughal emperor akbar the great, is on the delhi-agra highway, about 13 kilometres (8.1 miles) from the agra fort. the four-storied tomb combines both marble and sandstone in its exterior. the construction of sikandra was commenced in akbar's reign and was completed by his heir and son jahangir in 1613. the tomb with is set amidst a large garden and is enclosed by four battlemented walls, each with a large gateway. the 99 names of allah have been inscribed on the tomb. the tomb has seen some damage to its minarets and other aspects, which was inflicted by the jats of bharatpur. the vast gardens around sikandra are inhabited by several blackbucks, which are in the process of being shifted to the etawah safari park. next to akbar's tomb, stands the tomb of mariam-uz-zamani, the favorite wife of akbar.
tomb of mariam-uz-zamani
other places of interest[edit]
agra also has several other places of interest, most of them from its mughal past. they include the jama masjid, chini ka rauza, aram bagh, mariam's tomb, and mehtab bagh among others. the jama masjid is a large mosque attributed to shah jahan's daughter jahanara begum, built-in 1648, notable for its unusual dome and absence of minarets. the chini ka rauza, notable for its persian influenced dome of blue glazed tiles, is dedicated to the prime minister of shah jahan, afzal khan. the aram bagh, commonly known as ram bagh today, is one of the oldest mughal garden in india, and was built by the mughal emperor babur in 1528 on the bank of the yamuna. it lies about 2.3 km (1 mi) north of the taj mahal. the original name of the gardens was aram bagh, or 'garden of relaxation', and this was where babur used to spend his leisure time. tomb of mariam-uz-zamani, is the tomb of mariam, the favorite wife of emperor akbar. the tomb is within the compound of the christian missionary society. the mehtab bagh, or 'moonlight garden', is on the opposite bank of the river yamuna from the taj mahal. agra also has a nearby bird sanctuary, keetham lake. also known as sur sarovar bird sanctuary, it is situated within the surdas reserved forest. the lake has nearly two dozen varieties of migratory and resident birds.
city[edit]
jahangiri mahal mina mosque moti masjid (agra fort) musamman burj (agra fort) nagina masjid shah jahani mahal throne of jahangir dayal bagh temple aram bagh, agra chini ka rauza akbar's church jama mosque, agra jaswant ki chhatri mehtab bagh gyarah sidi black taj mahal ram barat taj mahotsav paliwal park
around[edit]

tomb of mariam-uz-zamani fatehpur sikri buland darwaza panch mahal, fatehpur sikri tomb of salim chishti ibadat khana maktab khana jama mosque, fatehpur sikri keetham lake bateshwar, uttar pradesh temples

other places of interest. clockwise from upper left: plan of the taj mahal complex with the mehtab bagh gardens to the left, jama masjid, chini ka rauza, tomb of mariam-uz-zamani.

vtetourist attractions in and near agraworld heritage sites agra fort fatehpur sikri taj mahal mughal architecture chini ka rauza gyarah sidi itmad-ud-daulah mariam's tomb sikandra mosques jama mosque mina mosque moti mosque nagina mosque humayun mosque other religious places bateshwar guru ka tal mankameshwar temple swamibagh shopping kinari bazaar loha mandi raja ki mandi sadar bazaar sanjay place gardens aram bagh mehtab bagh paliwal park wildlife sanctuaries keetham lake national chambal wildlife sanctuary patna bird sanctuary fairs ram barat taj mahotsav
