agra
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
cuisine[edit]
the sweet dish petha, which is a symbol of mughal legacy.
agra's cuisine is derived from its mughal past. mughlai cuisine mainly consists of meat enriched with creamy, boldly flavoured curries, with lots of dried fruits and spices. vegetarian dishes, using paneer instead of meat are equally loved. mughal cuisine is available in restaurants all around the city. petha, a sweet made using ash gourd, is one of the famous dishes of agra, and is available in many varieties. another dish that is endemic to agra is dalmoth, which is a dry snack made with spicy fried dal (lentils), nuts and raisins. the breakfast specialties include bedai, which is a puffy kachori (made with all purpose flour, which is deep fried) with spicy filling inside and is generally served with spicy aloo sabzi and dahi.(curd) equally popular as a snack is chaat, a collective term which includes snacks like dahi-bhalla, raj kachori, samosas, and gol gappas, among others. paratha, a pan fried flat wheat bread which is stuffed with potatoes, cauliflower, carrots or paneer, is also popular, and eaten accompanied with curd, pickle and chutney.
taj mahotsav[edit]
taj mahotsav is a cultural festival and craft fair that was started in the year 1992 and has grown since then. the year 2019 was the 28th year of this mahotsav. the fair is held in a big field in shilpgram, near the eastern gate of the taj mahal. this festival also figures in the calendar of events of the department of tourism, government of india. a large number of indian and foreign tourists coming to agra join this festivity. one of the objectives of this craft fair is to provide encouragement to the artisans. it also makes available works of art and craft at reasonable prices that are not inflated by high maintenance cost. the mahotsav is hosted from 18 to 27 february every year. the theme for the 2020 taj mahotsav was sanskriti ke rang, taj ke sang. for the first time since 1992, taj mahotsav 2021 has been cancelled, because of tourism restrictions during the covid-19 pandemic.
