agra
Administration and politics[edit]
administration and politics[edit]
administration[edit]
local administration as of august 2020   key posts of local administration  person   mayor (elected post)  naveen kumar jain (bjp)   municipal commissioner  nikhil tikaram funde   vice-chairman of ada  devendra kumar singh kushwaha   district and divisional administration  person   divisional commissioner  anil kumar   district magistrate and collector  mr. navneet singh chahal ias   police administration  person   senior superintendent of police (ssp)  mr.prabhakar choudhary ips   adg, agra zone  ajay anand   ig, agra range
police administration[edit]

main article: agra police commissionerate
agra district comes under the agra police zone and agra police range, agra zone is headed by an additional director general (adg)-ranked indian police service (ips) officer, and the agra range is headed by a deputy inspector general (dig)-ranked ips officer.
the district police is headed by a senior superintendent of police (ssp), who is an ips officer, and is assisted by six superintendents of police or additional superintendents of police for city, east, west, crime, traffic, and protocol, either from the ips or the provincial police service. each of the several police circles is headed by a circle officer in the rank of deputy superintendent of police.
infrastructure and civic administration[edit]
agra municipal corporation or agra nagar nigam (amc or ann) is the municipal corporation responsible for the civic infrastructure and administration of the city of agra. this civic administrative body administers the city's public services. the mayor and municipal councillors are elected to five-year terms. the agra municipal corporation oversees four zones (hariparvat, lohamandi, tajganj and chhata) which are further subdivided into 100 wards. the amc boundary encompasses an area of 121 square km. the agra development authority (ada), is develops new housing, infrastructure and colonies in the city.
politics[edit]
vote share of parties in 2019 agra lok sabha.    bjp (57%)  bsp (38%)  inc (4%)  others (1%) incumbent mp satyapal singh baghel of bjp won the agra lok sabha constituency with a margin of 2,11,546 votes by defeating manoj kumar soni of bsp. satyapal singh baghel secured 6,46,875 votes.
agra district has two lok sabha constituencies, agra and fatehpur sikri, and nine uttar pradesh vidhan sabha (uttar pradesh legislative assembly) constituencies. the mp for agra constituency is sp singh baghel, from bharatiya janata party. ahead of the election the for 2022 uttar pradesh legislative assembly, it was announced that two more districts, including agra, could become a police commissionerate before the elections.
