ahmednagar
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
air[edit]
ahmednagar city has air connectivity by seaplane service. the port for seaplane is located at the mula dam water reservoir, 30 min away from ahmednagar city. the service offered by maritime energy heli air services pvt. ltd. (mehair) from 22 september 2014. ongoing flight is available from juhu, mumbai to mula dam.
rail[edit]

main article: ahmednagar railway station
ahmednagar railway station (station code:ang) belongs to solapur division of central railway zone of the indian railways. ahmednagar has rail connectivity with pune, manmad, kopargaon, shirdi, daund, goa, nasik and other metro-cities like new delhi, mumbai, chennai, kolkata, bangalore, ahmedabad. 41 express trains stop at this station. there is still a demand for direct rail connectivity to other major cities of india. ahmednagar station will now be a part of the pune railway division. 24 stations of the daund-ankai section will be merged with pune railway division. the daund-ankai section is currently under the management of the solapur railway division. the change to the pune division will increase the chances of starting demu services between ahmednagar and pune stations.
one of the oldest and important railway project of ahmednagar railway station was kalyan-ahmednagar railway project which was in planning stage since british regime. it was referred as 3rd ghat project. the survey of this project was carried out in 1973,2000, 2006, 2014 etc. this project was in pink book in 2010. unfortunately this project could not be completed. the alignment length of this project was 184 km and it could have been shortest route for marathwada, andhra and telangana. the major challenge for this project was proposed 18.96 km tunnel in malshej ghat section.
malshej kriti samiti is following for kalyan ahmednagar railway project. kalyan-murbad section which is first phase of this project is already under survey stage.
survey of ahmednagar-aurangabad railway line with 120 km length was also carried out in march 2021. the dpr report of this project is under preparation.
ahmednagar-karmala railway option is also getting explored.  ahmednagar railway station will become an important railway junction in future to the level similar to daund railway junction. kalyan-murbad-ahmednagar line is also possible in future.
road[edit]
ahmednagar is well connected by roads with major cities of maharashtra and other states. ahmednagar has 4 lane road connectivity to aurangabad, parbhani, nanded, pune, nashik, beed, solapur, osmanabad. national highway 222 from kalyan to nirmal near adilabad in telangana passes through the city. the maharashtra state road transport corporation (msrtc) and different private transport operators provide bus service connecting the city to all parts of the state.
ahmednagar has 3 main bus stands:
msrtc tarakpur bus stand – all the buses going via ahmednagar, do stop here. maliwada bus stand – the buses going to aurangabad/ jalgaon/ akola take a halt here. pune bus stand – buses going to pune/mumbai take a halt here.
intra city transport[edit]
several ways to have a commute in the city. autorickshaws, which can be trusted as a private commute in the city. sharing rikshaws also been part of the daily life of the citizen. newly bus service has been established by municipal corporation in the month of july 2019 which can turn a safer and cheaper commute to the citizens in the future. main routes in the city are:
maliwada bus stand to nirmalnagar via delhi gate, patrakar chowk, premdan chowk, professor colony, and pipeline road. maliwada bus stand to dr.vikhe patil college, vilad ghat. via delhi gate, patrakar chowk, premdan chowk, savedi naka, nagapur midc, and new nagapur. maliwada bus stand to kedgaon via sakkar chowk, kinetic chowk, railway flyover and ambikanagar. maliwada bus stand to bhingar via market yard chowk, nagar college, gpo chowk, ahmednagar fort, shukrawar bazaar, and bhingar wes. maliwada bus stand to nimbalak via delhigate, patrakar chowk, premdan chowk, savedi naka and nagapur midc
