ahmedabad
Civic administration[edit]
civic administration[edit]
gujarat high court in ahmedabad
ahmedabad is the administrative headquarters of ahmedabad district, administered by the ahmedabad municipal corporation (amc). the amc was established in july 1950 under the bombay provincial corporation act of 1949. the amc commissioner is an indian administrative service (ias) officer appointed by the state government who reserves the administrative executive powers, whereas the corporation is headed by the mayor of ahmedabad. the city residents elect the 192 municipal councillors by popular vote, and the elected councillors select the deputy mayor and mayor of the city. the  mayor, bijal patel, was appointed on 14 june 2018. the administrative responsibilities of the amc are: water and sewerage services, primary education, health services, fire services, public transport and the city's infrastructure. amc was ranked 9th out of 21 cities for "the best governance & administrative practices in india in 2014. it scored 3.4 out of 10 compared to the national average of 3.3." ahmedabad registers two accidents per hour.
the city is divided into seven zones constituting 48 wards. the city's urban and suburban areas are administered by the ahmedabad urban development authority (auda).
the city is represented by two elected members of parliament in the lok sabha (the lower house of the indian parliament) and 21 members of the legislative assembly at the gujarat vidhan sabha. the gujarat high court is located in ahmedabad, making the city the judicial capital of gujarat. law enforcement and public safety is maintained by the ahmedabad city police, headed by the police commissioner, an indian police service (ips) officer.
public services[edit]
health services are primarily provided at ahmedabad civil hospital, the largest civil hospital in asia. ahmedabad is one of the few cities in india where the power sector is privatised. electricity in the city is generated and distributed by torrent power limited, owned and operated by the ahmedabad electricity company, which was previously a state-run corporation.
