ahmednagar
Tourist places[edit]
tourist places[edit]


this article contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. please help to clean it up to meet wikipedia's quality standards. where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (april 2020)
salabat khan's tomb.
ahmednagar fort entrance.
tomb of salabat khan ii – also called the chand bibi palace, this is a solid three-storey stone structure situated on the crest of a hill 13 km from ahmednagar city. meherabad, where the samadhi (tomb) of the spiritual master meher baba is a place of pilgrimage, particularly on the anniversary of his death, amartithi. his later residence was at meherazad (near pimpalgaon village), approximately nine miles north of ahmednagar. ahmednagar fort (bhuekot killa) – built by ahmed nizam shah in 1490, this is one of the best-designed and most impregnable forts in india. as of 2013, it is under the control of the military command of india. cavalry tank museum – the armoured corps centre and school has created a museum with an extensive collection of 20th-century armoured fighting vehicles.
samadhi of meher baba
ralegan siddhi – a village which is a model for environmental conservation. social activist anna hazare is from ralegan siddhi. pimpri gawali – is a village in parner taluka, about 25 km away from ahmednagar and known for the watershed development and agribusiness activities.  deep continuous contour trenches (cct) avhane, shevgaon – temple of ganesh (nidrista/sleeping). shri munjaba tample, ukkadgaon – in shrigonda taluka about 60 km from ahmednagar main city it is very beautiful temple with four big statue of ganapati, mahadev (shankar), vishnu and hanuman on temple and thousands of devotees visit this place. jamgaon – place in parner taluka with a historic 18th-century palace built by mahadaji shinde. shree kshetra korthan khandoba devastan temple of lord khandoba. mahatma phule krishi vidyapeeth, rahuri mahatma phule krishi vidyapeeth is an agricultural university at rahuri, named after an activist and social reformer of 19th century—one of four agricultural universities in the state. mula dam: it is 52 km from the ahmednagar city shani shingnapur - temple of god shani
