ahmedabad
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]

main article: culture of ahmedabad
navaratri celebrations in ahmedabad
ahmedabad observes a range of festivals. celebrations and observances include uttarayan, an annual kite-flying day on 14 and 15 january. nine nights of navratri are celebrated with people performing garba, the most popular folk dance of gujarat, at venues across the city. the festival of lights, deepavali, is celebrated with the lighting of lamps in every house, decorating the floors with rangoli, and the lighting of firecrackers. the annual rath yatra procession on the ashadh-sud-bij date of the hindu calendar at the jagannath temple, the festival of colours holi, celebrated on the last full moon day in the end of the winter and based on the lunisolar hindu calendar, and the procession of tajia during the muslim holy month of muharram are important events.
one of the most popular dishes in ahmedabad is a gujarati thali, which was first served commercially by chandvilas hotel in 1900. it consists of roti (chapati), dal, rice and shaak (cooked vegetables, sometimes with curry), with accompaniments of pickles and roasted papads. sweet dishes include laddoo, mango, and vedhmi. dhoklas, theplas and dhebras are also very popular dishes in ahmedabad. beverages include buttermilk and tea. drinking alcohol is forbidden in ahmedabad.
there are many restaurants, which serve indian and international cuisines. most of the food outlets serve only vegetarian food, as a strong tradition of vegetarianism is maintained by the city's jain and hindu communities. the first all-vegetarian pizza hut in the world opened in ahmedabad. kfc has a separate staff uniform for serving vegetarian items and prepares vegetarian food in a separate kitchen, as does mcdonald's. ahmedabad has a quite a few restaurants serving typical mughlai non-vegetarian food in older areas like bhatiyar gali, kalupur and jamalpur.
manek chowk is an open square near the centre of the city that functions as a vegetable market in the morning and a jewellery market in the afternoon. however, it is better known for its food stalls in the evening, which sell local street food. it is named after the hindu saint baba maneknath. parts of ahmedabad are known for their folk art. the artisans of rangeela pol make tie-dyed bandhinis, while the cobbler shops of madhupura sell traditional mojdi (also known as mojri) footwear. idols of ganesha and other religious icons are made in huge numbers in the gulbai tekra area. in 2019, there was a swing in the trend and people are adopting a more eco-friendly version of the ganesha statue. the shops at the law garden sell mirrorwork handicrafts.
swaminarayan temple, ahmedabad
three main literary institutions were established in ahmedabad for the promotion of gujarati literature: gujarat vidhya sabha, gujarati sahitya parishad and gujarat sahitya sabha. saptak school of music festival is held in the first week of the new year. this event was inaugurated by ravi shankar.
the sanskar kendra, one of the several buildings in ahmedabad designed by le corbusier, is a city museum depicting its history, art, culture and architecture. the gandhi smarak sangrahalaya and the sardar vallabhbhai patel national memorial have permanent displays of photographs, documents and other articles relating to mahatma gandhi and sardar patel. the calico museum of textiles has a large collection of indian and international fabrics, garments and textiles. the hazrat pir mohammad shah library has a collection of rare original manuscripts in arabic, persian, urdu, sindhi and turkish. there is the vechaar utensils museum which has stainless steel, glass, brass, copper, bronze, zinc and german silver tools.
shreyas foundation has four museums on the same campus. shreyas folk museum (lokayatan museum) has art forms and artefacts from the communities of gujarat. kalpana mangaldas children's museum has a collection of toys, puppets, dance and drama costumes, coins and a repository of recorded music from traditional shows from all over the world. kahani houses photographs of fairs and festivals of gujarat. sangeeta vadyakhand is a gallery of musical instruments from india and other countries.
l d institute of indology houses 76,000 hand-written jain manuscripts with 500 illustrated versions and 45,000 printed books, making it the largest collection of jain scripts, indian sculptures, terracottas, miniature paintings, cloth paintings, painted scrolls, bronzes, woodwork, indian coins, textiles and decorative art, paintings of rabindranath tagore and art of nepal and tibet. n c mehta gallery of miniature paintings has a collection of ornate miniature paintings and manuscripts from all over india.
in 1949 darpana academy of performing arts was established by the scientist dr. vikram sarabhai and bharat natyam dancer mrinalini sarabhai, and thus ahmemedabad city became the centre of indian classical dance.
