ahmedabad
Education[edit]
education[edit]
gujarat university, ahmedabad
indian institute of management, ahmedabad

main article: education in ahmedabad
ahmedabad had a literacy rate of 79.89% in 2001 which rose to 89.62 percent in 2011. as of 2011, the literacy rate among males and females were 93.96 and 84.81 percent, respectively.
among the several universities in ahmedabad, gujarat university is the largest and claims to be the oldest; although the gujarat vidyapith was established in 1920 by mahatma gandhi – it received no charter from the british raj, becoming a deemed university only in 1963. a large number of colleges in the city are affiliated with gujarat university. gujarat technological university, cept university, nirma university, institute of infrastructure technology research and management (iitram) and ahmedabad university all date from this century. dr. babasaheb ambedkar open university has over 100,000 students enrolled on its distance learning courses.
ahmedabad is home to the indian institute of management ahmedabad, which was ranked first among management institutes in the country by the ministry of human resource development in 2018.
established in 1947 by the scientist vikram sarabhai, the oldest of the research institutes in ahmedabad, the physical research laboratory is active in space science, astronomy, high-energy physics and other areas of research. the darpana academy of performing arts, established in 1949 by mrinalini sarabhai, was listed by unesco as an institution active in the "protection of the world cultural and natural heritage".
schools in ahmedabad are either run publicly by the municipal corporation, or privately by entities, trusts and corporations. the majority of schools are affiliated with the gujarat secondary and higher secondary education board, although some are affiliated with the central board for secondary education, council for the indian school certificate examinations, international baccalaureate and national institute of open school.
