ajmer
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of ajmer
jahangir receives prince khurram at ajmer on his return from the mewar campaign
ajmer was originally known as ajayameru. the city was founded by an 11th-century chahamana king ajaydeva. historian dasharatha sharma notes that the earliest mention of the city's name occurs in palha's pattavali, which was copied in 1113 ce (1170 vs) at dhara. this suggests that ajmer was founded sometime before 1113 ce. a prashasti (eulogistic inscription), issued by vigraharaja iv and found at adhai din ka jhonpra, states ajayadeva (that is ajayaraja ii) moved his residence to ajmer.
a later text prabandha-kosha states that it was the 8th-century king ajayaraja i who commissioned the ajayameru fort, which later came to be known as the taragarh fort of ajmer. according to historian r. b. singh, this claim appears to be true, as inscriptions dated to the 8th century ce have been found at ajmer. singh theorizes that ajayaraja ii later expanded the town area, constructed palaces, and moved the chahamana capital from shakambhari to ajmer.
in 1193, ajmer was annexed by the mamluks of the delhi sultanate, and later was returned to rajput rulers under condition of tribute.
in 1556, ajmer came under the mughal empire after being conquered by mughal emperor akbar. it was made the capital of the eponymous ajmer subah. the city enjoyed special favour under the mughals, who made frequent pilgrimages to the city to visit the dargah of moinuddin chishti. the city was also used as a military base for campaigns against rajput rulers, and on a number of occasions became the site of celebration when a campaign bore success. mughal emperors and their nobles made generous donations to the city, and endowed it with constructions such as akbar's palace and pavilions along the ana sagar. their most prominent building activities were in the dargah and its vicinity. jahanara begum and dara shikoh, children of shah jahan, were both born in the city in 1614 and 1615 respectively.
mughal patronage of the city had waned by the beginning of the 18th century. in 1771, the scindias conquered the city, and in 1818, the british gained authority over the city. colonial-era ajmer served as the headquarters of the ajmer-merwara province and possessed a central jail, a large general hospital, and two smaller hospitals according to gazetteer, 1908. it was the headquarters of a native regiment and of a railway volunteer corps. from the 1900s, the united free church of scotland, the church of england, the roman catholics, and the american episcopal methodists have mission establishments here. at that time there were twelve printing presses in the city, from which eight weekly newspapers were published.
at the time of independence ajmer continued as a separate state with its own legislature until its merger with erstwhile rajputana province then called rajasthan. the legislature of ajmer state was housed in the building which now houses t. t. college. it had 30 mlas, and haribhau upadhyay was the first chief minister of the erstwhile state, with bhagirath chaudhary as the first vidhan sabha speaker. in 1956, after acceptance of the proposal by fazil ali, ajmer was merged into rajasthan to form ajmer district with the addition of kishangarh sub-division of jaipur district.
