alappuzha
Education[edit]
education[edit]
st. joseph's college for women, alappuzha
government t. d. medical college, alappuzha
there are schools, computer institutes and colleges all over the district, with nine training schools, 405 lower primary schools, 105 high schools and 87 higher secondary schools.
the first school in alappuzha, the church missionary society (cms) school, was established in 1816. the school was established by the rev. thomas norton, the first cms missionary to india. the school is run by the csi christ church, alappuzha. the first higher secondary school in alappuzha was the leo xiiith higher secondary school, which was opened on 1 june 1889 by portuguese bishop john gomes pereira of cochin. the first polytechnic college in alappuzha was the carmel polytechnic college, established by fr. gilbert palaekunnel and it's managed by cmi congregation. carmel is the academically top-ranked polytechnic in the state still.
college of engineering and management, punnapra
carmel polytechnic college, punnapra
colleges in alappuzha offer both graduate and postgraduate courses for their students.
major college institutes[edit]
college of engineering, cherthala cochin university college of engineering kuttanad sanatana dharma college s. d. v. college of arts and applied science sree narayana college cherthala - sn college kanjikkuzhy n.s.s. college cherthala government college, ambalappuzha college of engineering and management, punnapra mar gregorios college punnapra college of engineering chengannur college of applied sciences, mavelikkara carmel college of engineering and technology alappuzha government t d medical college, alappuzha st. joseph's college for women, alappuzha st. michael's college, cherthala t. k. madhava memorial college st. aloysius college edathua college of nursing vandanam tols school for career development, alappuzha - 690517 k.v.m college of nursing,cherthala k.v.m institute of paramedical science,cherthala k v m institute of pharmacy,cherthala government polytechnic college cherthala government women's polytechnic college, kayamkulam bishop moore college mavelikkara milad-e-sherief memorial college, kayamkulam (msm) christian college, chengannur
