alappuzha
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
pallathuruthy bridge
road[edit]
national highways[edit]
nation highway 66 is one of the longest national highway in india. it connects panvel to kanyakumari and crisscrosses through the alappuzha city centre. the alappuzha bypass, to route the national highway around city centers between kommady and kalarkode. national highway 66 connects alappuzha city to other major cities like mumbai, udupi, mangalore, kannur, kozhikode, ernakulam, kollam and trivandrum. there is a plan to upgrade state highway 11 to a national highway in order to help connect alappuzha to kodaikanal as part of promoting the coastal-hill tourism project.
state highways[edit]
alappuzha ksrtc station
state highway 11
there are eight state highways in alappuzha district, of which three of them originates from alappuzha town. state highway 11 starts from kalarcode and ends at perunna. this highway is locally known as ac road (alappuzha-changanassery road) and it covers a distance of 24.2 km. it is an important road which connects alappuzha town with kottayam district. stateway high 40 is an interstate highway in alappuzha district which connects alappuzha town with madurai in tamil nadu. it is the only interstate highway in alappuzha district. state highway 66 originates from alappuzha town and terminates at thoppumpady.
there are two bus terminals are situated in alappuzha town, one for ksrtc buses (situated near state water transport corporation headquarters, boat jetty road) and the v k soman memorial municipal bus stand for private buses and interstate bound contract carriage buses (situated near vazhicherry). a temporary ksrtc bus dippo and garage facing national highway 66  is under construction near valavanadu. ksrtc buses connect alappuzha with cities like banglore, mysore, kollur, manglore, chennai, coimbathore, palani, ooty, kochi, trivandrum, thiruvalla and all other major towns in kerala. the kayamkulam - ernakulam ksrtc fast passenger chain service through the national highway 66  is very popular. setc and tnstc ply many daily services to the city. karnataka state road transport corporation have two daily services originating from alappuzha.city private buses are green and white colored (formally white and brown). city buses connect alappuzha with places like mannancherry, kalavoor, erattakulangara, kanjippadam, and aspinwal. some buses connects alappuzha to cherthala through coastal highway and kanichukulangara route. many contract carriage buses originate from alappuzha to cities like chennai, banglore, coimbathore, madurai, velankanni and puducherry
water[edit]
the presence of a lot of backwaters and canals makes water transport a popular means of transport. national waterway-3 passes through alappuzha. there is a swtd boat jetty in the city that lies opposite to the ksrtc bus stand. it is served by boat services to  kottayam and kollam cities besides other small towns and jetties. availing an swtd boat is a cheaper alternative to houseboats for visiting tourists.
public water transport organised by kerala state transport agency for long-distance transport within the back waters of kerala (india)
rail[edit]
alappuzha is linked by ernakulam–kayamkulam coastal railway line and connects to cities like trivandrum, kollam, cochin, coimbatore, chennai, delhi, bokaro and mumbai. the railway station is about 4 kilometres (2.5 mi) from the heart of the city. a total of four trains originate from alappuzha to cities like kannur, chennai, dhanbad and tatanagar. there are a lot of local trains running throughout the day, which connect alappuzha to other towns near by. since alappuzha is a prime destination, trains from important cities like delhi, chandigarh, hyderabad, bangalore, mangalore, kozhikode and amritsar pass through this station.
air[edit]
cochin international airport, which is 78 kilometres (48 mi) to the north, is the closest airport. thiruvananthapuram international airport, 159 kilometres (99 mi) to the south, is the other airport that links the district with other countries. international tourists use these airports to reach alappuzha. the other nearest airports are located at kozhikode (236 kilometres (147 mi)) and coimbatore (254 kilometres (158 mi)). a helipad in the town is reserved for government uses.
