aligarh
History[edit]
history[edit]
written references to the city commence only from 12th century onward; however, archeological records suggest that the town used to be inhabited by jains. the area of aligarh before the ghurid conquest of the region, was under the sway of dor rajputs in twelfth century.
in 1194, qutb-ud-din aibak had mounted a successful invasion of the region and hisam-ud-din ulbak was installed as the first muslim governor; court-historian hasan nizami noted kol to be "one of the most celebrated fortresses of hind". beginning the 13th century, the place featured — as kol or koil — in multiple persian (as well as non-persian) sultanate sources as a center of economic prominence esp. for production of distilled wine. by the mid-13th century, the town commanded enough importance for (would-be sultan) ghiyas ud din balban to erect a minaret.
under the khiljis and tughlaqs, the prominence continued unabated; it had become an iqta by the times of alauddin khalji.
kol is mentioned in ibn battuta's rihla, when ibn battuta, along with 15 ambassadors representing ukhaantu khan, emperor of the mongol chinese yuan dynasty, travelled to kol city en route to the coast at cambay (in gujarat) in 1341. according to battuta, it would appear that the district was then in a very disturbed state since the escort of the emperor's embassy had to assist in relieving jalali from an attacking body of hindus and lost an officer in the fight. ibn batuta calls kol "a fine town surrounded by mango groves". from these same groves the environs of kol would appear to have acquired the name sabzabad or "the green country".
in the reign of akbar, kol was made a sirkar and included the dasturs of marahra, kol ba haveli, thana farida and akbarabad. akbar and jahangir visited kol on hunting expeditions. jahangir clearly mentions the forest of kol, where he killed wolves.
during the time of ibrahim lodhi, muhammad, son of umar, was the governor of kol. he built a fort at kol and named the city muhammadgarh, after himself, in 1524–25. sabit khan, who was then the governor of this region, rebuilt the old lodhi fort and named the town sabitgarh, after himself.
the ruler of koil was bargujar king bahadur singh who, in 1753, rose against the destruction of hindu temples. the jat ruler, surajmal, with consent of safdar jang, occupied the fort of koil. bahadur singh continued the battle from another fort and died fighting in what is known as the "battle of ghasera". it was renamed ramgarh and rao durjan singh ponia of bijauli was made the kiledar of the fort.  when a persian mughal shia commander, najaf khan, captured ramgarh, he renamed it and gave it its present name of aligarh. aligarh fort (also called aligarh qila), as it stands today, was built by french engineers under the control of french officers benoît de boigne and perron.
battle of aligarh (1803)[edit]
general lord gerard lake who oversaw the battle of ally ghur
the battle of aligarh was fought on 1 september 1803 during the second anglo-maratha war (1803–1805) at aligarh fort. the british 76th regiment, now known as the duke of wellington's regiment besieged the fort, which was under the control of the french officer perron, and established british rule. in 1804, the aligarh district was formed by the union of the second, third and fourth british divisions with the addition of anupshahr from muradabad and sikandra rao from etawa. on 1 august 1804, claude russell was appointed the first collector of the new district.
