aligarh
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
by rail[edit]

see also: aligarh railway station
aligarh junction railway station is the primary station for aligarh city and is a major stop on the delhi-kolkata route. it is an a-class railway station. it is one of the oldest railway station of this route. it connects aligarh to the states of west bengal, odisha, bihar, jharkhand, north-east and most of uttar pradesh, and important stations of cities such as new delhi railway station, mumbai central, kolkata, bhopal junction railway station, indore, jammu, gwalior, lucknow, jhansi, puri, kanpur central railway station, etawah junction railway station, tundla junction railway station, agra cantonment railway station and varanasi. aligarh railway station handles over 136 trains daily (in both directions) and serves around 204,000 passengers every day. aligarh has one branch railway line to bareily.
aligarh city has following railway stations:
aligarh junction: an a-class railway station somna (gabhana) railway station mahrawal railway station kalua railway station daudkhan railway station mandrak railway station harduaganj railway station (satha, near kasimpur power house) manjoorgarhi railway station (chherat)
by road[edit]
aligarh is 140 km from new delhi. it is one of the division of upsrtc. uttar pradesh state road transport corporation (upsrtc) buses serve cities all over the state and cities in uttarakhand, rajasthan, madhya pradesh and haryana.
aligarh city has three upsrtc bus stations:
aligarh depot(old bus station/gandhi park bus station) bus station masoodabad(esta. 2000) (budh vihar bus station/new bus station/workshop bus station/raghuveerpuri bus station) depot bus station(non-functional from 2018 to 2021)(now functioning since 2021 post renovation into a well facilitated bus station) isbt rasualabad sarsaul (new bus station/sootmill bus station)(functioning since 2018 due to sudden non-functioning of massodabaad bus station during 2018-2021 period)
there are buses plying from aligarh to delhi at frequent intervals via
1) khair, tappal, palval, faridabad, delhi - the route is under construction between khair and palval and should be strictly avoided by cars. no toll charges.
2) khair, tappal, yamuna expressway, noida, greater noida, delhi, gurgaon - best and recommended route for delhi, noida, gurgaon. toll charges are ₹120 between aligarh and delhi.
3) old gt road, bulandshahr, ghaziabad, delhi - nh 91 - it is a 4-lane highway. toll charges are ₹190.
following highways are connected to aligarh:
national highway 91 - it connects kolkata to national capital new delhi. ghaziabad-bulandshahr-aligarh section is a 4-lane highway. national highway 93 - it connects moradabad to taj nagri agra via aligarh. aligarh-agra section is constructed as brijbhoomi expressway. yamuna expressway - it is a 6-lane expressway connecting greater noida with agra.
aligarh city has mahanagar bus service (city bus service) which provides local transport to aligarh.
route-1 j n medical-uperkot route-2 gandhi park-sarsaul route-3 ghantarbagh-quarsi route-4 gandhi park-boner route-5 etah chungi-collectrate
apart from this an electronic bus service has been  running within the city since january 2022.
by air[edit]
the nearest international airport from aligarh is indira gandhi international airport, new delhi. it is 140 km from aligarh.
aligarh airport, in dhanipur, is under construction on nh 91. dhanipur air strip is used as flying club. the government of uttar pradesh signed a memorandum of understanding with the airports authority of india in february 2014 for the development of the airport. the land acquisition for airport will be initiated soon and after its development flight operations will be started under regional connectivity scheme.
