allahabad
Transportation and utilities
transportation and utilities
new yamuna bridge in allahabad
air
the main international and domestic airport serving allahabad is allahabad airport (iata: ixd, icao: veab), which began operations in february 1966. the airport is 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) from the city centre and lies in bamrauli, allahabad. as of now, allahabad is connected to eleven cities by flight, where air india's regional arm alliance air connects allahabad to delhi and bilaspur, while indigo connects it to bangalore, mumbai, kolkata, raipur, bhopal, bhubaneswar and gorakhpur. the nearest international airports are in varanasi and lucknow.
the world's first airmail flight took place from allahabad to naini in february 1911, when 6,000 cards and letters where flown by french pilot henri pequet.
railways
allahabad junction is one of the main railway junctions in northern india and headquarters of the north central railway zone.
allahabad has following nine railway stations in its city limits :
station name  station code  railway zone  number of platforms   allahabad junction  pryj, formerly ald  north central railway  10   allahabad chheoki junction railway station  pcoi, formerly acoi  north central railway  3   naini railway station  nyn  north central railway  4   subedarganj railway station  sfg  north central railway  3   prayag junction railway station  prg  northern railway  3   prayagraj sangam railway station  pyg  northern railway  5   phaphamau railway station  pfm  northern railway  3   allahabad city railway station  prrb, formerly aly  north eastern railway  5   jhusi railway station  ji  north eastern railway  3
the city is connected to most other uttar pradesh cities and major indian cities such as kolkata, new delhi, hyderabad, patna, mumbai, visakhapatnam, chennai, bangalore, guwahati, thiruvananthapuram, pune, bhopal, kanpur, lucknow and jaipur.
roads
buses operated by uttar pradesh state road transport corporation and allahabad city transport service are an important means of public transport for travelling to various parts of the city, state and outskirts. auto rickshaws have been a popular mode of transportation. cycle rickshaws are the most economical means of transportation in allahabad along with e-rickshaws.
there are several important national highways that pass through allahabad:
nh (acc. new numbering system)  nh (acc. old numbering system)  route  total length   nh 19  nh 2  delhi » mathura » agra » kanpur » allahabad » varanasi » mohania » barhi » palsit » dankuni (near kolkata)  2542   nh 30  nh 24b & nh 27  udham singh nagar, uttarakhand » bareilly » lucknow » raebareli » allahabad » rewa » jabalpur » raipur » krishna district, andhra pradesh  2022   nh 35  nh 76 & nh 76 extension  mahoba » banda » chitrakoot » allahabad » mirzapur » varanasi  346   nh 330  nh 96  allahabad » pratapgarh » sultanpur » faizabad » gonda » balrampur  263
cable-stayed, new yamuna bridge (built 2001–04), is in allahabad and connects the city to the suburb of naini across the yamuna. the old naini bridge now accommodates railway and auto traffic. a road bridge across the ganges also connects allahabad and jhusi. national waterway 1, the longest waterway in india, connects allahabad and haldia.
the city generates 5,34,760 kg of domestic solid wastes daily, while the per capita generation of waste is 0.40 kg per day. the sewer service areas are divided into nine zones in the city. allahabad municipal corporation oversees the solid waste management project. allahabad was the first city to get pre-paid meters for electricity bill in uttar pradesh. the city is equipped with over 40 cctvs at major crossings and markets.
