allahabad
Etymology
etymology
the location at the confluence of ganges and yamuna rivers has been known in ancient times as prayāga, which means "place of a sacrifice" in sanskrit (pra-, "fore-" + yāj-, "to sacrifice"). it was believed that god brahma performed the very first sacrifice (yāga, yajna) in this place.
the word prayāga has been traditionally used to mean "a confluence of rivers". for allahabad, it denoted the physical meeting point of the rivers ganges and yamuna in the city. an ancient tradition has it that a third river, invisible sarasvati, also meets there with the two. today, triveni sangam (or simply sangam) is a more frequently used name for the confluence.
prayagraj (sanskrit: prayāgarāja), meaning "the king among the five prayāgas", is used as a term of respect to indicate that this confluence is the most splendid one of the five sacred confluencies in india.
it is said that the mughal emperor akbar visited the region in 1575 and was so impressed by the strategic location of the site that he ordered a fort be constructed. the fort was constructed by 1584 and called ilahabas or "abode of allah", later changed to allahabad under shah jahan. speculations regarding its name however, exist. because of the surrounding people calling it alhabas, has led to some people holding the view that it was named after alha from alha's story. james forbes' account of the early 1800s claims that it was renamed allahabad or "abode of god" by jahangir after he failed to destroy the akshayavat tree. the name, however, predates him, with ilahabas and ilahabad mentioned on coins minted in the city since akbar's rule, the latter name became predominant after the emperor's death. it has also been thought to not have been named after allah but ilaha (the gods). shaligram shrivastav claimed in prayag pradip that the name was deliberately given by akbar to be construed as both hindu ("ilaha") and muslim ("allah").
over the years, a number of attempts were made by the bjp-led governments of uttar pradesh to rename allahabad to prayagraj. in 1992, the planned rename was shelved when the chief minister, kalyan singh, was forced to resign following the babri masjid demolition. 2001 saw another attempt led by the government of rajnath singh which remained unfulfilled. the rename finally succeeded in october 2018 when the yogi adityanath-led government officially changed the name of the city to prayagraj.
