allahabad
Human resources
human resources
public health
mln medical college, the government medical college in allahabad
department of health and family welfare, government of uttar pradesh oversees the healthcare system of allahabad. its healthcare system comprises  hospitals, medical facilities, private clinics and diagnostic centers. these facilities are either privately owned or owned and facilitated by the government. allahabad has a total of twenty four hospitals run by the administration. founded in memory of pandit motilal nehru in 1961, motilal nehru medical college (mln medical college and associated hospitals) is a government medical college in allahabad, with swaroop rani nehru hospital, kamla nehru memorial hospital, sarojini naidu children's hospital and manohar das eye hospital serving under its affiliation. some of the known multispecialty hospitals in and around allahabad are alka hospital, swaroop rani nehru hospital, amardeep hospital, asha hospital, ashutosh hospital and trauma centre, bhola hospital, dwarka hospital, d r s hospital, jain hospital, parvati hospital pvt. ltd., phoenix hospitals pvt. ltd., priya hospital, sangam multispeciality hospital, vatsalya hospital, yashlok hospital and research centre, etc.
allahabad healthcare also comprises many medical research institutes. the city also has diagnostic labs, clinics, consultation providers and pathological institutes like kriti scanning centre, prayag scan & diagnostic centre, and sprint medical.
projects
ibm selected allahabad among 16 other global cities for its smart cities programme to help it address challenges like waste management, disaster management, water management and citizen services. the company commenced working on solid waste management and power sector in generating renewable energy.
a memorandum of understanding was signed on 25 january 2015 between the united states trade and development agency (ustda) and the government of uttar pradesh for developing allahabad as a smart city. the pact came into existence after the bilateral meeting between the indian prime minister narendra modi and the us president barack obama in october 2014, wherein it was announced that the us would assist india in developing three smart cities, allahabad, ajmer and visakhapatnam, in a boost to india's 100 smart city programme. on 27 august 2015 the official list of 98 cities to be developed as smart cities, including allahabad, was announced by the government of india. allahabad task force was set up by the minister of urban development venkaiah naidu which consists of the divisional commissioner as chairperson, secretaries of housing and urban planning and urban development in government of uttar pradesh, the district magistrate and collector, the vice-chairperson of allahabad development authority and the mayor in addition to the additional secretary (urban development) in the ministry of housing and urban affairs and representatives of the ministry of external affairs and the ustda. the project is being assisted by the u.s.-india business council.
as a part of smart city project, civil lines is being developed on the lines of lucknow's hazratganj. a sum of  ₹20 crore (us$3,024,000) has been sanctioned to beautify all prominent crossings of the city. as per the plan, the administration proposed uniformity in signage and colour of buildings and a parking lot to be set up to solve traffic congestion. a 1.35 km long riverfront along yamuna river would be developed by the allahabad development authority, irrigation and power departments at a cost of ₹147.36 crore. the riverfront would be developed in two phases. in the first phase, around 650 metres at arail would be developed along with the yamuna, while in the second phase 700 metres of the stretch between new yamuna bridge and boat club in kydganj would be taken up.
