alwar
Tourist attractions[edit]
tourist attractions[edit]
fort view of alwar
fairy queen[edit]

main article: fairy queen (locomotive)
the fairy queen, a national treasure (cultural artifact) of india and the world's oldest working locomotive engine (c. 1855 ce), operates as a tourist luxury train between delhi and alwar.
bala qila[edit]
bala qila (lit. "high fort"), also known as alwar fort, is a fort approximately 300 meters above the city, founded by the 15th-century khanzada rajput ruler hasan khan mewati and built on the foundations of a 10th-century mud fort. situated on the aravalli range, the fort is 5 kilometres long and about 1.5 kilometres wide with turrets, a large gate, a temple, and a residential area.

city palace[edit]
the city palace, also known as vinay vilas mahal, built in 1793 ce by raja bakhtawar singh, blends the rajputana and islamic architectural styles and has marble pavilions on lotus-shaped bases in its courtyard. the palace houses a state museum with a collection of manuscripts, including one depicting emperor babur’s life, ragamala paintings and miniatures, and historic swords that once belonged to muhammad ghori, emperor akbar and aurangzeb; and a golden durbar hall. this palace that once belonged to the maharaja (lit. great ruler) has now been converted into a district administrative office also housing the district court.
sariska tiger reserve[edit]

main article: sariska tiger reserve
the sariska tiger reserve, a national park and tiger reserve, is located in the aravali hills only a few kilometres away from alwar. declared a wildlife reserve in 1955 and a national park in 1982, it is the first reserve in the world to have successfully relocated tigers. the sanctuary, which became a part of india's project tiger in 1978, also preserves other species including rare birds and plants.
bhangarh fort[edit]

main article: bhangarh fort
bhangarh fort, branded as the fourth most haunted palace in the world, and the most haunted palace in asia, is a 17th-century fort built by bhagwant das for his younger son madho singh i. the fort, a monument protected by the archaeological survey of india and is known for its association to legends and paranormal activities, is a tourist attraction for visitors across the world.
siliserh lake[edit]

main article: siliserh lake
siliserh lake is 19th century lake created by maharaja vijay singh of alwar, situated 8 miles southwest of alwar.
hill fort kesroli[edit]

main article: hill fort kesroli
hill fort kesroli, a 14th-century fort, has now been converted into and is conserved as a heritage hotel.
