alwar
History[edit]
history[edit]
ancient history[edit]
the ancient name of alwar is salva or salwa (tribe).alwar was a part of the matsya kingdom, one of the 16 ancient mahājanapadas. in late vedic texts (such as the jaiminiya brahmana), the salva or salvi tribe is described as a non-vedic tribe that occupied kurukshetra and conquered the kuru kingdom
the salvas[edit]
the salvas settled along the yamuna river and the alwar province of rajasthan after attacking the kuru kingdom, and they later accepted vedic culture by the end of the vedic era as they converged with the remaining kurus and the surasena mahajanapada, near matsya kingdom.
medieval history[edit]
the darbar of raja bakhtawar singh of alwar in 1810
from time to time, a different rajput sub-clan came to rule alwar. examples include the nikumbh, the khanzada rajputs, the badgujar rajput, and finally the naruka (kachwaha) rajputs who took the control over this area. the maratha empire also ruled this region for a short period. a rajput, partap singh, took the alwar fort from the jat raja of bharatpur and laid down the foundation for modern day alwar.
hemchandra vikramaditya (hemu), born in machari, rajgarh, a village in alwar, was a hindu emperor of north india during the 16th century. this was a period when the mughals and afghans were vying for power in the region. hemu captured delhi on 7 october 1556 after defeating the mughal forces in the battle of delhi in the tughlaqabad area in delhi, and became the de facto emperor. he won twenty-two battles in succession and became the last hindu emperor of delhi. in 1556, after his defeat in the second battle of panipat, he was executed and mughal regime was restored in north india.
colonial era[edit]

main article: alwar state
neemrana
alwar state, a princely state established in 1770, was established by a kachwaha rajput named pratap singh who was earlier a jagirdar of "dhai gaon" (two-and-a-half villages) near machari. his successor "bakhtawar singh kachwaha" was defeated after launching an armed incursion into neighbouring jaipur state (ruled by their kachwaha seniors, erstwhile overlords of his predecessor) and being forced to accept the consequent treaty mediated by east india company prohibiting him from political relations with other states without the consent of the colonial british. according to the "gazetteer of ulwar" published by the british raj, alwar state was subdivided into four regions:
rath region: current behror and neemrana, was ruled by lah chauhan rajput zamindar who had descended from prithviraj chauhan. sahesh mal was a son of raja sangat singh chauhan. sangat was the great-grandson of chahir deo chauhan, brother of famous king prithviraj chauhan. in accordance with the pledge by the raja sangat singh chauhan to his younger queen for marrying her in his old age, her two sons from him were bestowed the rath area and its headquarter of mandhan near neemrana. king sangat singh chauhan's 19 sons from the older queen set out to seek their fortunes. of the 19 brothers, harsh dev chauhan and sahesh mal chauhan arrived in the gurgaon district.  lah chauhan, the ruler of rath, was a son of raja sangat singh chauhan by the younger rani whose two sons became inheritors of raja sangat singh's territory of rath with its headquarter at mandhan when other 19 sons from the other wives were required to quit the kingdom as per the promise of raja sangat.
new residential buildings in neemrana alwar
wai region: current bansur and thana ghazi, was ruled by shekhawat rajput zamindars. narukhand region: current rajgarh and laxmangarh, was ruled by naruka sub-branch of kachwaha rajputs who were from the same branch as the ruling kings of the alwar state mewat region: current palwal and nuh districts, had the highest population of the meo muslims.
post-independence[edit]
alwar acceded to the dominion of india following the independence of india in 1947. on 18 march 1948, the state merged with three neighbouring princely states (bharatpur, dholpur and karauli) to form the matsya union. on 15 may 1949, it was united with neighbouring princely states and the territory of ajmer to form the present-day indian state of rajasthan. alwar was designated as part of the national capital region, resulting in additional development projects including rapid-rail to delhi and drinking water improvements. the military cantonment of itarana lies on the outskirts of alwar.
