amaravati
History[edit]
history[edit]

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (may 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
southern india, andhra pradesh, amaravati, satavahana period – veneration of the buddha as a fiery pillar -100 bc – c. ad 200 – cleveland museum of art, ohio, united states
dharanikota (dhānyakatakam) near amaravati was an important city in the cultural heritage and history of andhra pradesh. its history dates back to 2nd century bce when it was the capital of the satavahana dynasty of the (andhras), one of the earliest indian empires and the ancestral dynasty of andhra pradesh. the satavahanas are prominent in the history of andhra pradesh. their main language was prakrit written using brahmi script, which served as the base for the script of telugu language. they issued many coins with this prakrit language which can be found in many inscriptions in this region today. the practice of buddhism was predominant during this period and the dynasty was partly responsible for the prevalence of buddhism in the region.
the city was also once a holy site of mahayana buddhism. the city used to have a large buddhist stupa now known as amaravati stupa but then called a mahachaitya, which was ruined over time. it was also the centre of buddhist learning and art where many buddhist followers from many south east asian countries used to visit. it can be seen from the amaravati stupa, many buddhist inscriptions, sculptures and gautam buddha statue in the city. many other ancient amaravati sculptures and buddhist relics from the region were unfortunately destroyed over the time and the largest group was removed to the government museum, chennai and others to the british museum during british rule, which can be seen there today. the sculptures from amaravati depict many scenes from buddhist art, inscriptions and buddhist stupas. the city along with nagarjuna konda is viewed as one of the richest holy sites of buddhism in the whole of india.
the present capital area has its historical significance of having recorded its first-ever legislation 2,200 years ago. the present-day capital region includes the amaravati village. the area has been ruled by the mauryas, satavahanas, ikshvakus, vishnukundina, pallavas, cholas, kakatiyas, delhi sultanate, musunuri nayaks, bahmani sultanate, vijayanagara empire, sultanate of golconda and mughal empire successively before the founding of the nizam of hyderabad in 1724. it was ceded to france in 1750 but was captured by the east india company in 1759. guntur returned to the nizamate in 1768 but was ceded to britain again in 1788. it was briefly occupied by hyder ali. it was then ruled by vasireddy venkatadri nayudu, who founded the modern amaravathi village, using building materials from the stupa, which he largely demolished. it was part of the madras presidency during the british colonial period.
as per the andhra pradesh reorganisation act, 2014, hyderabad became the capital of the then newly formed state of telangana, post bifurcation of andhra pradesh. however, hyderabad would remain as the joint capital of both states for a period not exceeding ten years. hence, amaravati is being built to serve as the capital of andhra pradesh.
the foundation for the city was laid at uddandarayunipalem on 22 october 2015. the prime minister of india, narendra modi;  the  chief minister of andhra pradesh, n. chandrababu naidu; the vice president of india and the chairman of the rajya sabha muppavarapu venkaiah naidu; then governor e. s. l. narasimhan; the japanese minister for economy trade and industry, yosuke takagi; and the singaporean minister for trade and industry, s. iswaran, laid the foundation for the city.
in august 2020, andhra pradesh legislative assembly passed andhra pradesh decentralisation and inclusive development of all regions act, 2020. according to its provisions, visakhapatnam is the executive capital while amaravati and kurnool serve as legislative and judicial capitals, respectively. the decision resulted in widespread protests by the farmers of amaravati. the act has been challenged in andhra pradesh high court, which ordered to maintain status quo until the court completes its hearing. on 22 november 2021, the government, led by y. s. jagan mohan reddy, have withdrawn the act.
