ambattur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road[edit]
the chennai-tiruvallur high road (cth road or nh205) passes through ambattur and the chennai-kolkata highway is just about 8 km puzhal from the place making it a strategic location. on an average, about 40,000 passenger car units use the cth road. the new chennai bypass road between maduravoyal and puzhal passes through ambattur industrial estate. it connects nh4 with nh5 and nh205 via ambattur industrial estate.
the ambattur bus terminus is located adjacent to the mth road and has mtc (city buses) connecting ambattur with various points in chennai city. ambattur does not have a proper bus terminus despite being one of the biggest localities of chennai. a lot of buses from avadi and the outskirts of chennai also pass through ambattur, offering good connectivity. there are also a few buses operating to nagercoil, tirunelveli, madurai, vellore and other parts of tamil nadu from here. buses to the famous pilgrim centre of tirupathi can also be availed from ambattur.
on 4 october 2013, the tamil nadu highways department issued a go extending the entire stretch of the road till tirutani to 6 lanes at a cost of ₹ 1,680 million, by means of land acquisition from 12 villages. in the first phase, the road will be widened to 100 ft (4 lanes) with centre median at a cost of ₹ 980 million.
rail[edit]
the chennai central-arakkonam railway line passes through ambattur and has two railway stations in the neighbourhood. ambattur railway station serves the residential areas and pattaravakkam railway station serves the ambattur industrial estate, kallikuppam and karruku neighbourhood areas. suburban broad gauge emu trains operate daily from chennai central and chennai beach to avadi, tiruvallur, patabiram military siding, arakkonam, vellore, tirupathi, and tiruttani via ambattur.  by rail, ambattur is 40 minutes from chennai central, 20 minutes from perambur and 10 minutes from villivakkam. many fast emu locals (suburban trains) towards tiruvallur, arakkonam and tiruttani, stop at ambattur railway station, but fast local trains towards chennai central do not halt at ambattur because non availability of platform in fast line. by fast local train it takes 25 minutes from chennai central. ambattur having passenger reservation centre timing 8.00hrs to14.00hrs. there is a pending request to extension of platform length to accommodate express trains, increase timing of passenger reservation centre, subway, and overbridge at ambattur
