ambattur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
the economy of ambattur is mainly industrial. it was well known as an auto ancillary hub. however, in the late 2000s many it companies have come up in ambattur.
one indiabulls park, ambattur
ambattur industrial estate[edit]

main article: ambattur industrial estate
the ambattur industrial estate, spread over an area of 1,430 acres (4.9 km), houses about 1,800 units and is the biggest small scale industrial estate in south asia. it was commissioned in the year 1964 by the government of tamil nadu. companies like britannia industries, ti cycles of india, dunlop, and tvs have their plants in ambattur. tata communications has its satellite earth station at the ambattur–red hills road, known as wireless among the locals. jaya tv, vijay tv, asianet and kairali relay signals from this facility. the heavy vehicles factory (hvf) in avadi, which manufactures military tanks, is just 5 km from this place, adding to its importance. a railway concrete sleeper manufacturing company is located near the ambattur railway station. textile industries such as ambattur clothing limited (acl) and bombay fashions have their facilities here and employ thousands of women. the units in the industrial estate generate a combined annual revenue of over ₹ 35,000 million.
the industrial estate has a bus terminus. the ambattur estate terminus and the maintenance centre with a capacity of 100 buses were opened in 1967. however, as of 2012, the centre handles 125 buses a day, with a staff count of 1,100.
it parks[edit]
the ambit it park with cma cgm, iopex technologies and css corp
ambattur industrial estate has attracted a lot of it companies due to its proximity to residential neighbourhoods and the lower rentals. the lease rentals of it parks in ambattur are half of those in the city. information technology (it) companies such as milests, hcl technologies, dell and tata consultancy services have their development centres here. out of the 22 facilities that hcl technologies has in chennai, six are in ambattur. there are also a few bpo centres such as perot systems, telebuy, polaris bpo, serco, first source & iopex technologies. prince info park, kochar technology park, ambit it park. chennai tech park, a 2,400,000 sq ft (220,000 m), state-of-the-art, futuristic it park, on 10 acres (40,000 m) of land is commissioned since 2009 by indialand park. now that 10 acres commercial building is bought by indiabulls securities ltd for rs 600 crores and renamed it as one indiabulls park, current occupiers of the complex include royal bank of scotland, kone, britannia industries, ajuba, covenant, telebuy, ibox, bean balls, germany's modisch, yes bank and etisalat. one indiabulls park is one of the major it parks in ambattur. as a remarkable mile stone, cma cgm, world's 3rd largest liner started their documentation centre along with regional ecommerce team in ambit park.
however, the demand for commercial space in ambattur is not as robust as rajiv gandhi salai which is marketed extensively by the government. while it and ites firms in ambattur have brought in a new image to the industrial belt that has been known for its garment and auto-ancillary units, it has increased the real estate prices.
