amravati
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
amravati railway station
road[edit]
the star city bus services are run by the amravati municipal corporation. private auto rickshaws and cycle rickshaws are also popular. amravati has also started a women's special city bus which is a first in the vidarbha region.
the maharashtra state road transport corporation (msrtc) provides transport services for intercity and interstate travel. many private operators also ply on the highly traveled amravati – pune and amravati – indore routes. bus services to cities like nagpur, yavatmal, bhopal, harda, indore, raipur, jabalpur, mumbai, pune, akola, dharni, nanded, aurangabad, jalna, burhanpur, parbhani, solapur, khandwa, gondia, shirdi, hyderabad, paratwada (achalpur) and kolhapur are also available.
national highway 6 (old numbering), which runs from hazira (surat) to kolkata, passes through amravati.
new star city buses are launched in the city replacing the old city buses.
railway[edit]
amravati has three railway stations:
amravati railway station, situated in the heart of the city is a terminus. the railway line could not be extended beyond it. therefore, a new station was constructed outside the city when a new railway line was laid to connect badnera junction to narkhed on the nagpur-itarsi main railway line. amravati railway station is situated on the branch line from badnera on nagpur-bhusawal section of howrah-nagpur-mumbai line of central railways. new amravati railway station building was inaugurated on 10 december 2011. amravati railway station provides multiple shuttle services to badnera throughout the day. badnera junction railway station serves the area of badnera in amravati. it is a junction station on the howrah-nagpur-mumbai line. there is a broad gauge line to narkhed.
airport[edit]
dr. panjabrao deshmukh airport amravati, located at bellora, 15 kilometers from nh-6 towards yavatmal, is operated by the maharashtra airport development company (madc). presently it has no commercial scheduled flights. the nagpur flying club has applied to dgca for permission to shift its flying operations to amravati airport. it also has a helipad facility. madc is acquiring about 400 hectares of land for developing the airport and related facilities at an estimated cost of rs. 2.25 billion.
