amritsar
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
air[edit]
sri guru ramdas ji international airport
amritsar hosts sri guru ramdasji international airport. the airport is connected to other parts of india and other countries with direct international flights to cities. the airport is 12th busiest airport of india in terms of international traffic. the airport serves not only amritsar, but also many other districts in punjab and neighbouring states.
rail[edit]
amritsar junction
amritsar central railway station is the main station serving amritsar. it is the busiest railway station in indian state of punjab and one of the highest revenue generating station of northern railways. due to high traffic at the amritsar central railway station, indian railways has planned to develop 2 satellite stations-chheharta and bhagtanwala, in order to decongest traffic at this station. as many as 6 trains would be shifted to chheharta railway station in the first phase. the indian railway stations development corporation has also planned to make the amritsar central railway station, a world class railway station on lines of international airport based on ppp model. the project has received an overwhelming response with bids from 7 private firms, including gmr.
road[edit]
amritsar is located on the historic grand trunk road (g.t road), also known as nh 1 now renumbered as national highway 3. an expressway by name of delhi-amritsar-katra expressway at the cost of ₹25,000 crore is approved under bharatmala scheme which will cut the travel time from amritsar to new delhi by road from current 8 hours, to 4 hours. another expressway, called amritsar jamnagar expressway is under construction which will connect amritsar to jamnagar in gujarat. additionally, nh 54 (old nh15), nh 354 and nh 503a connect amritsar to other parts of state and rest of india. a ring road will also be built surrounding all 4 sides of amritsar
₹ 450,000,000 is being spent to expand the amritsar-jalandhar stretch of g.t. road to four lanes. in 2010, elevated road with four lanes connected to the national highway for better access to the golden temple has been started.
amritsar metrobus[edit]
amritsar inter state bus stand
amritsar has a bus rapid transit service, the amritsar metrobus which was launched on 28 january 2019. 93 fully air-conditioned tata marcopolo buses are used for the service connecting places like
golden temple jallianwala bagh guru nanak dev university golden gate india gate, amritsar durgiana temple khalsa college
