asansol
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
the economy of asansol is primarily dependent on its steel and coal industries, railways, and its trade and commerce.
steel[edit]
iisco panoramic view, asansol
modernised isp
the steel authority of india iisco (indian iron and steel company ltd) steel-making plant at kulti was the first such facility in india. it became well known during the 1960s and 1970s, with its company shares being traded on the london stock exchange. however, a decade later the company became loss-making until it was revived in 2006 when it merged with the steel authority of india. modernisation at iisco steel plant has helped the city develop at a very rapid pace. the plant's capacity will be raised from 0.4 mt to 2.5 mt of saleable steel, using what will be the biggest blast furnace in the country. as of 2015, the investment for modernization was the single largest investment in west bengal till then.
coal[edit]
eastern coalfields, which has its headquarters in sanctoria p.o. - dishergarh, has a significant presence in the area due to the huge deposits of high-quality coal. however, most of the coalfields and surrounding residential colonies are located away from the main city. nearby areas like raniganj, chinakuri, and jamuria are of particular importance as coal blocks. as of 2012, the total coal reserve in the ecl command area up to 600 metre depth was 49.17 billion tonnes.
railways[edit]
railways also is a big contributor to the economy of asansol. railways were the first employer in the city and they are credited with developing the city in the late 19th century. asansol is one of four divisions of eastern railway zone and among the major revenue generating divisions in indian railways. world's largest vertically integrated organisation chittaranjan locomotive works under indian railways is also situated here. it is india's first locomotive works and asia's largest locomotive manufacturer.
other business ventures[edit]
other industries include dishergarh power supply, damodar valley corporation, burn standard co. which is now a subsidiary of eastern railways, hindustan cables limited and cement factories like burnpur cement.
