asansol
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road[edit]
the grand trunk road (nh 19 - old numbering nh 2) runs across the subdivision and nh 14 (old numbering nh 60) connects asansol with odisha. nh 19 has been broadened as part of the golden quadrilateral project and now allows three-lane traffic in both directions. a highway bypass avoids the areas of ushagram, murgasol, asansol bazar, chelidanga, bnr, gopalpur, neamatpur, kulti, and barakar. some of the other important roads of the city are namely vivekananda avenue, burnpur road, and s.b gorai road.
the south bengal state transport corporation operates daily bus services to kolkata and numerous other destinations, such as malda, siliguri, midnapur, bankura, siuri, purulia, burdwan, kalna, howrah, barackpore, digha, bolpur, kirnahar and berhampore. the north bengal state transport corporation also runs services to and from the city and towns in north bengal like malda, raiganj and balurghat. there are also many private buses, taxis and radio taxis, which ply locally and on intercity and interstate routes.
railway[edit]
asansol junction railway station building
asansol junction railway station is the division of eastern railway zone this is one of the oldest divisions on the indian railways and has always been in the forefront of operations, both freight and passenger. as far as eastern railway is concerned, asansol division is referred to as the heart of operations, being at the crossroads of the grand chord route via gaya and the main line route via patna. with a total of 629.38 route kilometers, the division has the unique distinction of having quadruple lines (two up and two down line) from khana to sitarampur.
the railway track from kolkata to delhi passes through the subdivision and bifurcates into the main line and the grand chord line at sitarampur railway junction, a little to the west of asansol railway junction. another railway track links asansol with adra and then to jamshedpur via purulia and kharagpur via bankura. a branch line connects andal with sainthia on the sahibganj loop.
almost all the trains linking kolkata with north india also connect with asansol including sealdah rajdhani, howrah rajdhani, howrah duronto, sealdah humsafar express, yuva express and shalimar duronto. as a result, asansol enjoys good connectivity with cities like new delhi, jammu, amritsar, ludhiana, allahabad, kanpur, lucknow, dehradun, jaipur, kota, jodhpur, jaisalmer, gwalior, bhopal, indore, patna, ranchi and dhanbad on the one hand and commands a fairly good traffic movement towards the western cities like mumbai, ahmedabad and surat and southern cities like bhubaneshwar, visakhapatnam, vijaywada, chennai, bangalore and trivandrum. it is also connected with guwahati in the north-east region.
air[edit]
the domestic airport that serves the city is kazi nazrul islam airport. the airport is located in andal. it is roughly 25 kilometres (16 mi) from the asansol city bus terminus.
there is also a private airport located at burnpur riverside area. at present this airport is operated by iisco. recently airport authority of india gave nod to start commercial flights for six routes in west bengal; burnpur airport being one of them is hopeful to receive its first commercial flight by the last quarter of 2019.
the nearest international airport is netaji subhas chandra bose international airport at dum dum in kolkata.
