aurangabad
Administration and politics
administration and politics
local administration

further information: aurangabad municipal corporation
aurangabad municipal corporation (amc) is the local civic body. it is divided into six zones. the municipal council was established in 1936, the municipal council area was about 54.5 km. it was elevated to the status of municipal corporation from 8 december 1982, and simultaneously including eighteen peripheral villages, making the total area under its jurisdiction to 138.5 km extended its limits.
the city is divided in 115 electoral wards called as prabhag, and each ward is represented by a corporator elected by the people from each ward. there are two committees, general body and standing committee headed by the mayor and the chairman respectively. amc is responsible for providing basic amenities like drinking water, drainage facility, road, street lights, healthcare facilities, primary schools, etc. amc collects its revenue from the urban taxes which are imposed on citizens. the administration is headed by the municipal commissioner; an ias officer, assisted by the other officers of different departments.aurangabad metropolitan region development authority (amrda) is being formed for the allover development of the region.[1]
state and central administration
aurangabad division is one of the six administrative divisions of maharashtra state in india. aurangabad divisions almost completely coincides with the marathwada region of maharashtra. aurangabad contributes one seat to the lok sabha – aurangabad (lok sabha constituency). in 2019 general election, aimim candidate sayed imtiyaz jaleel was elected as a member of parliament from aurangabad.
aurangabad also contributes three state assembly seats namely aurangabad east, aurangabad central and aurangabad west which are represented by atul moreshwar save (bjp), pradeep jaiswal (shiv-sena) and sanjay shirsat (shiv-sena) respectively since 2019 maharashtra legislation assembly election.
himroo shawl       bombay high court aurangabad bench, itc welcomgroup's the rama international, ajanta ambassador & cidco town center – aerial view       kranti chowk
