avadi
IT Parks and Companies[edit]
it parks and companies[edit]
it park[edit]
tidel park avadi (pattabiram) graphic representation
a new tidel park, with a built-up area of 5,57,000 square feet, will be built on a 10-acre land at a cost of ₹ 2,300 million at avadi–pattabiram on mth road. this is expected to provide jobs for 30,000 people. the construction work started in august 2020. dell technology and tata consultancy service (tcs) have shown interest to move to avadi. idex a central government it company for defence export is expected to invest 1000 crores in tidel park avadi - pattabiram.
in addition to military establishments, avadi also houses a number of it/ites and other service sector-based firms.
defence industrial corridor[edit]
the major defence establishments with divisions in avadi are the indian air force, indian army, heavy vehicles factory (hvf), efa-engine factory, combat vehicles research and development establishment (cvrde), central reserve police force (crpf), indian navy, central vehicle depot (cvd), the ordnance depot (od), unfit vehicles park (uvp) and the ordnance clothing factory (ocf).
the indian air force has a mechanical transport training institute technical (mtti) here for training its personnel on driving and repairing vehicles, and also a base repair depot for repair and maintenance of its various equipment. cvrde undertakes major research on battle tanks and other combat vehicles. mbt arjuns, armoured ambulances, combat improved ajeyas and nag anti-tank missiles are some of the recent products from cvrde. the heavy vehicles factory produces an indigenous version of the t-72 tank known as ajeya. hvf also produces the main battle tank arjun. the production of t-90s bhishma tanks started in 2006–2007. the tamil nadu special police (tsp) also has a division in avadi, the tn 2nd and 5th battalion.
there was a world war ii airfield at red hills, sholavaram, approachable from the junction close to the crpf camp, avadi, immediately after the military hospital.
manufacturing industrial hub[edit]
avadi is around 7 km from ambattur industrial estate and 22 km from sriperambudur - irungattukottai sipcot industrial park.
