avadi
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
railways[edit]
avadi railway station is one of the important suburban terminal stations of the chennai suburban railway network. it lies on the chennai jolarpettai mainline. few express trains like thiruvananthapuram chennai mail, alappuzha chennai express, and tirupati chennai garudadri stops at avadi. the proximity of the mtc bus terminus to the railway station has led many commuters to choose avadi as a transit point. avadi railway station has the seventh highest footfall in southern railways with numbers exceeding 75,000 per day.
suburban services[edit]
avadi is connected very well with rest of the city by emu trains. there are frequent suburban trains from avadi to chennai central, chennai beach, arakonam, thiruvallur, tiruthani and velachery. by rail, avadi is 45 minutes from chennai central, 24 minutes from perambur and 15 minutes from villivakkam. some trains originate from here as avadi has an emu shed, which handles the majority of the suburban train operations on the northern and western line. the western line has 229 services a day and the north line has 83, which accounts 312 trains.
roadways[edit]
chennai–tiruttani highway extension[edit]
the tamil nadu highways department issued a go on 4 october 2013 to extending the entire chennai – tiruttani highway to 6 lanes at a cost of ₹1.68 billion. the first phase will involve extending the road to 4 lanes – 100 ft with center median and encroachments have already started to be removed. the road junction at avadi checkpost connects avadi poonamallee road with the cth road. the chennai outer ring road (orr) passes through western part of avadi.
avadi bus terminus[edit]
avadi bus terminus is located very near to the avadi railway station on the chennai - thiruvallur high road (cth road). the depot is situated beside the bus terminal. avadi is well connected to various locations of chennai as well as rural areas surrounding north-western and western chennai. the main service provider though is the state-owned metropolitan transport corporation buses, few private buses are also available.
share autos[edit]
share autos are one of the popular modes of transport there. share autos are mostly spotted near avadi bus terminal and checkpost junction. they usually ply between poonamallee, karayanchavadi, pattabiram, thiruninravur, anna nagar, nungambakkam and koyambedu.
