bangalore
Education
education

main article: education in bangalore

indian institute of science – one of the premier institutes of science and engineering in indiaindian institute of management bangalore, one of the premier management institutes in india
schools

main article: list of schools in bangalore
bangalore has a literacy rate of around 88%, according to the 2011 national census. until the early 19th century, education in bangalore was mainly run by religious leaders and restricted to students of that religion. the western system of education was introduced during the rule of mummadi krishnaraja wodeyar. in 1832, the british wesleyan mission established the first english school, the wesleyan canarese school. the fathers of the paris foreign missions established the st. joseph's european school in 1858. the bangalore high school was started by the mysore government in 1858 and the bishop cotton boys' school was started in 1865. in 1945 when world war ii came to an end, king george royal indian military colleges was started at bangalore by king george vi; the school is popularly known as bangalore military school
primary, middle school and secondary education in bangalore is offered by various schools which are affiliated to one of the government or government recognised private boards of education, such as the secondary school leaving certificate (sslc), central board of secondary education (cbse), council for the indian school certificate examinations (cisce), international baccalaureate (ib), international general certificate of secondary education (igcse) and national institute of open schooling (nios). schools in bangalore are either government run or are private (both aided and un-aided by the government). bangalore has a significant number of international schools due to large number of expats and people employed in the it sector. after completing their secondary education, students either attend a pre-university course or continue an equivalent high school course in one of three streams – arts, commerce or science – in various combinations. alternatively, students may enroll in diploma courses. upon completing the required coursework, students enroll in general or professional degrees in universities through lateral entry.
universities

main article: list of institutions of higher education in bangalore
national law school of india university, a premier law university
established in 1858, the central college of bangalore is the city's oldest college. it was affiliated originally with university of mysore and subsequently with bangalore university. in 1882 priests from the paris foreign missions society established st. joseph's college. bangalore university was established in 1886; it is affiliated with over 500 colleges and has a total student enrolment of over 300,000. the university has two campuses within bangalore – jnanabharathi and central college. university visvesvaraya college of engineering was established in 1917 by m. visvesvaraya and is affiliated with many private engineering colleges. some private institutions in bangalore include symbiosis international university, svkm's nmims, cmr university, christ university, jain university, pes university, dayananda sagar university and ramaiah university of applied sciences. private medical colleges include st. john's medical college, m. s. ramaiah medical college, kempegowda institute of medical sciences, and vydehi institute of medical sciences and research centre. the m. p. birla institute of fundamental research has a branch in bangalore.
