bangalore
Civic administration
civic administration

see also: infrastructure in bangalore
management

the karnataka high court is the supreme judicial body in karnataka and is located in bangalore.the vikasa soudha, situated adjacent to the vidhana soudha, houses many state ministries.
the bruhat bengaluru mahanagara palike (bbmp, greater bangalore municipal corporation) is in charge of civic administration of the city. it was formed in 2007 by merging 100 wards of the erstwhile bangalore mahanagara palike, with seven neighbouring city municipal councils, one town municipal council and 110 villages around bangalore. the number of wards increased to 198 in 2009. the bbmp is run by a city council of 250 members, including 198 corporators representing each of the wards of the city and 52 other elected representatives, consisting of members of parliament and the state legislature. elections to the council are held once every five years and are decided by popular vote. members contesting elections to the council usually represent one or more of the state's political parties. a mayor and deputy mayor are also elected from the elected members of the council. elections to the bbmp were held on 28 march 2010, after a gap of three and a half years since the expiry of the previous elected body's term, and the bharatiya janata party was voted into power – the first time it had ever won a civic poll in the city. indian national congress councillor sampath raj became the city's mayor in september 2017; the vote was boycotted by the bjp. in september 2018, indian national congress councillor gangambike mallikarjun was elected as mayor, replacing sampath raj. in 2019 bjp's m goutham kumar took charge as mayor. on 10 september 2020, the term of the bbmp council ended and gaurav gupta was appointed as the administrator of bbmp. the municipal commissioner of bangalore is tushar giri nath, and the police commissioner is pratap reddy.
bangalore's rapid growth has created several administrative problems relating to traffic congestion and degrading infrastructure. the unplanned nature of growth in the city resulted in massive traffic gridlocks; a flyover system and one-way traffic systems were introduced, which were only moderately successful. a 2003 battelle environmental evaluation system (bees) evaluation of bangalore's physical, biological and socioeconomic parameters indicated that bangalore's water quality and terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems were close to ideal, while the city's socioeconomic parameters (traffic, quality of life) air quality and noise pollution were poor. the bbmp works in conjunction with the bangalore development authority (bda) and the agenda for bangalore's infrastructure and development task force (abide) to design and implement civic and infrastructural projects.
the bangalore city police (bcp) has seven geographic zones, includes the traffic police, the city armed reserve, the central crime branch and the city crime record bureau and runs 86 police stations, including two all-women police stations. other units within the bcp include traffic police, city armed reserve (car), city special branch (csb), city crime branch (ccb) and city crime records bureau (ccrb). as capital of the state of karnataka, bangalore houses important state government facilities such as the karnataka high court, the vidhana soudha (the home of the karnataka state legislature) and raj bhavan (the residence of the governor of karnataka). bangalore contributes four members to the lower house of the indian parliament, the lok sabha, from its four constituencies: bangalore rural, bangalore central, bangalore north, and bangalore south, and 28 members to the karnataka legislative assembly.
electricity in bangalore is regulated through the bangalore electricity supply company (bescom), while water supply and sanitation facilities are provided by the bangalore water supply and sewerage board (bwssb).
the city has offices of the consulate general of germany, france, japan, israel, british deputy high commission, along with honorary consulates of ireland, finland, switzerland, maldives, mongolia, sri lanka and peru. it also has a trade office of canada and a virtual consulate of the united states.
pollution control
as of 2022, bangalore produces around 6000 metric tonnes of solid waste per day. this waste is transported from collection units located near hesaraghatta lake, to the garbage dumping sites. the city has considerable dust pollution, hazardous waste disposal, and disorganised, unscientific waste retrievals. the it hub, the whitefield region, is the most polluted area in bangalore. in 2016, a study found that over 36% of diesel vehicles in the city exceed the national limit for emissions.
anil kumar, commissioner of the bbmp, said: "the deteriorating air quality in cities and its impact on public health is an area of growing concern for city authorities. while much is already being done about collecting and monitoring air quality data, little focus has been given on managing the impacts that bad air quality is having on the health of citizens."
slums
according to a 2012 report submitted to the world bank by karnataka slum clearance board, bangalore had 862 slums out of around 2000 slums in all of karnataka. 42% of the households migrated from different parts of india like chennai, hyderabad and most of north india, and 43% of the households had remained in the slums for over 10 years. the karnataka municipality works to shift 300 families annually to newly constructed buildings. one-third of these slum clearance projects lacked basic service connections, 60% of slum dwellers lacked complete water supply lines and shared bwssb water supply.
waste management
ιn 2012, bangalore generated 2.1 million tonnes of municipal solid waste, or 194.3 kilograms per person. waste management in karnataka is regulated by the karnataka state pollution control board (kspcb) under the aegis of the central pollution control board (cpcb), a central government entity. as part of the waste management guidelines, the government of karnataka through the kspcb has authorised a few well-established companies to manage biomedical and other hazardous waste in karnataka.
