bangalore
Culture
culture

main article: culture of bangalore

bangalore karaga, one of the oldest and most important festivals in bangaloreindian cartoon gallery, bangaloreyakshagana – a theatre art of coastal karnataka is often played in town hall
bangalore is known as the "garden city of india" because of its greenery, broad streets, and presence of many public parks, such as lal bagh and cubbon park.  in may 2012, guidebook publisher lonely planet ranked bangalore third among the world's top ten cities to visit.
biannual flower shows are held at the lal bagh botanical gardens during the weeks of india's republic day and independence day. bangalore karaga or "karaga shaktyotsava" is one of bangalore's oldest festivals and is dedicated to the hindu goddess draupadi. it is celebrated annually by the thigala community over a period of nine days in march or april. the someshwara car festival, held annually in april, is a procession of the idol of the halasuru someshwara temple (ulsoor) led by the vokkaligas, a major landholding community in southern karnataka. karnataka rajyotsava is widely celebrated on 1 november and is a public holiday in the city, to mark the formation of karnataka state on 1 november 1956. other popular festivals in bangalore are ugadi, ram navami, eid ul-fitr, ganesh chaturthi, st. mary's feast, dasara, deepawali and christmas.
bangalore's social and economic diversity is reflected in its cuisine. roadside vendors, tea stalls, and south indian, north indian, chinese and western fast food are all popular. udupi restaurants are popular and serve predominantly vegetarian, regional cuisine. bangalore is also home to many vegan restaurants and vegan activism groups, and has been named as india's most vegan-friendly city by peta's indian branch.
art and literature
compared to delhi and mumbai, bangalore lacked a contemporary art scene until the 1990s, when several art galleries emerged, including the government-established national gallery of modern art. bangalore's international art festival, art bangalore, was established in 2010.
kannada literature flourished in bangalore even before kempe gowda laid the city's foundations. during the 18th and 19th centuries, kannada literature was enriched by the vachanas (a form of rhythmic writing) composed by the heads of the veerashaiva mathas (monastery) in bangalore. the headquarters of the kannada sahitya parishat, a nonprofit organisation that promotes the kannada language, is located in bangalore. the city has its own literary festival, known as the "bangalore literature festival", inaugurated in 2012.
the karnataka chitrakala parishath is an art gallery that showcases a collection of painting, sculptures, and various other forms of art. the indian cartoon gallery is located in the heart of bangalore, dedicated to the art of cartooning, and is the first of its kind in india. the gallery conducts fresh cartoon exhibitions of various professional as well as amateur cartoonists every month. the gallery has been organised by the indian institute of cartoonists based in bangalore that serves to promote and preserve the work of eminent cartoonists in india. the institute has organised more than one hundred exhibitions of cartoons.
theatre, music, and dance
bangalore is home to the kannada film industry, which produces about 200 kannada feature films each year. bangalore also has an active theatre culture; popular theatres include ravindra kalakshetra and the ranga shankara. the city has an active english- and foreign-language theatre scene; popular theatres include ranga shankara and chowdiah memorial hall. kannada theatre is popular in bangalore and consists mostly of political satire and light comedy. plays are organised mostly by community organisations, but some by amateur groups. drama companies touring india under the auspices of the british council and max müller bhavan also stage performances in the city frequently. the alliance française de bangalore also hosts numerous plays throughout the year.
bangalore is also a major centre of indian classical music and dance. the cultural scene features a diverse set of music concerts, dance performances and plays. performances of carnatic (south indian) and hindustani (north indian) classical music, and dance forms like bharat natyam, kuchipudi, kathakali, kathak, and odissi are very popular. yakshagana, a theatre art indigenous to coastal karnataka is often played in town halls. the two main music seasons in bangalore are april–may during the ram navami festival, and september–october during the dusshera festival, when music activities by cultural organisations are at their peak. though both classical and contemporary music are played in bangalore, rock music dominates the music of urban bangalore; bangalore has its own subgenre of rock, "bangalore rock", an amalgamation of classic rock, hard rock and heavy metal, and some jazz and blues. notable bands from bangalore include raghu dixit project, kryptos, inner sanctum, agam, all the fat children, and swaratma. bangalore is sometimes called as the "pub capital of india" and the "rock/metal capital of india" because of its underground music scene.
