bangalore
Media
media
the first printing press in bangalore was established in 1840 in kannada by the wesleyan christian mission. in 1859, the bi-weekly bangalore herald became the first english newspaper to be published in bangalore, and in 1860, the mysore vrittanta bodhini became the first kannada newspaper to be circulated in bangalore. vijaya karnataka and the times of india are the most widely circulated newspapers in kannada and english, respectively, closely followed by the prajavani and deccan herald – both owned by the printers (mysore) limited, the largest print media house in karnataka. other circulated newspapers include vijayvani, vishwavani, kannadaprabha, sanjevani, bangalore mirror, udayavani provide localised news updates.
all india radio, the indian national state radio service, started broadcasting from its bangalore station on 2 november 1955. all broadcasts were am until 2001, when radio city became the first private channel in india to start transmitting fm radio from bangalore; a number of other fm channels have been initiated since. the city probably has india's oldest amateur (ham) radio club – the bangalore amateur radio club (vu2arc), established in 1959.
bangalore got its first television network when doordarshan established a relay centre on 1 november 1981. a production centre was established in the doordarshan's bangalore office in 1983, thereby allowing the introduction of a news program in kannada on 19 november 1983. doordarshan also launched a kannada satellite channel on 15 august 1991, now named dd chandana. star tv was the first bangalorean private satellite channel, starting in september 1991. direct to home (dth) services also became available in bangalore from around 2007.
the first internet service provider in bangalore was stpi, which started offering internet services in early 1990s. this internet service was, however, restricted to corporates until vsnl started offering dial-up internet services to the general public at the end of 1995. bangalore has the largest number of broadband internet connections in india.
namma wifi is a free municipal wireless network in bangalore, the first free wifi in india. it began operations on 24 january 2014. service is available at m.g. road, brigade road, and other locations. the service is operated by d-vois and is paid for by the karnataka state government. bangalore was the first city in india to have access to 4g mobile internet services.
