bangalore
Transport
transport
air
the kempegowda international airport is located in devanahalli.
bangalore is served by kempegowda international airport, located at devanahalli, about 40 km (25 mi) from the city centre. formerly bangalore international airport, the airport started operations from 24 may 2008 and is privately managed by a consortium led by the gvk group. the city was earlier served by the hal airport at vimanapura, a residential locality in the eastern part of the city. the airport is the third-busiest in india after delhi and mumbai in terms of passenger and airplane traffic. taxis and air-conditioned volvo buses operated by bmtc connect the airport with the city.
railways and metro
namma metro (green line)
as of 2022, a rapid transit system called the namma metro is being built in stages. initially opened with the 7 km (4.3 mi) stretch from baiyappanahalli to mg road in 2011, roads totaling 42.30 km (26.28 mi) for the north–south and east–west lines were made operational in june 2017. phase 2 of the metro covering 72.1 km (44.8 mi) is under construction and includes two new lines along with the extension of the existing north–south and east–west lines. there are also plans to extend the north–south line to the airport, covering a distance of 29.6 km (18.4 mi).
bangalore is a divisional headquarters in the south western railway zone of the indian railways. there are four major railway stations in the city: krantiveera sangolli rayanna railway station; bangalore cantonment railway station; yeshwantapur junction and krishnarajapuram railway station, with railway lines towards jolarpettai in the east; guntakal in the north; kadapa (only operational until kolar) in the northeast; tumkur in the northwest; hassan and mangalore in the west; mysore in the southwest; and salem in the south. there is also a railway line from baiyappanahalli to vimanapura, no longer in use. though bangalore has no commuter rail as of 2022, there have been demands for a suburban rail service because of the large number of employees working in the it corridor areas of whitefield, outer ring road and electronic city. the rail wheel factory is asia's second-largest manufacturer of wheel and axle for railways and is headquartered in yelahanka, bangalore.
bus
bmtc's vajra buses are a popular in the it corridor. it was introduced in 2005 bmtc is the first rtc to do so in india. special volvo buses to airports are known as vayu vajra.
buses operated by bangalore metropolitan transport corporation (bmtc) are a staple of city public transport. while commuters can buy tickets on boarding these buses, bmtc also provides an option of a bus pass to frequent users. bmtc runs air-conditioned luxury buses on major routes and operates shuttle services from various parts of the city to kempegowda international airport.  the karnataka state road transport corporation operates 6,918 buses on 6,352 schedules, connecting bangalore with other parts of karnataka and with neighbouring states. the main bus depots that ksrtc maintains are the kempegowda bus station, locally known as "majestic bus stand", where most of the buses going out of the city ply from. some of the ksrtc buses to tamil nadu, telangana and andhra pradesh ply from shantinagar bus station, satellite bus station at mysore road and baiyappanahalli satellite bus station. bmtc and ksrtc were the first operators in india to introduce volvo city buses and intra-city coaches in india. three-wheeled, yellow and black or yellow and green auto-rickshaws, referred to as autos, are popular for transport. they are metered and can accommodate up to three passengers. taxis are usually available via phone calls or online services; they are metered and generally more expensive than auto-rickshaws.
road
an average of 1,750 vehicles are registered daily in bangalore regional transport offices (rtos). the total number of vehicles as of 2020 are around 8,500,000 vehicles, and the city's roads total 11,000 km (6,835 mi).

