bangalore
Economy
economy

main article: economy of bangalore
bangalore city skyline showing ub city to the left and richmond town area to the right
bangalore is second fastest growing metropolis in india. bangalore contributes 38% of india's total it exports. its economy is primarily service oriented and industrial, dominated by information technology, telecommunication, biotechnology, and manufacturing of electronics, machinery, automobiles, food, etc. major industrial areas around bangalore are adugodi, bidadi, bommanahalli, bommasandra, domlur, hoodi, whitefield, doddaballapura, hoskote, bashettihalli, yelahanka, electronic city, peenya, krishnarajapuram, bellandur, narasapura, rajajinagar, mahadevapura etc. it is the fifth indian city to host maximum numbers of fortune companies, after mumbai, delhi, kolkata and chennai.
infosys headquarters in bangalore
mercedes-benz r&d in whitefield, bangalore
the growth of it has presented the city with unique challenges. ideological clashes sometimes occur between the city's it moguls, who demand an improvement in the city's infrastructure; and the state government, whose electorate is primarily from rural karnataka. the encouragement of high-tech industry in bangalore, for example, has not favoured local employment development, but instead increased land values and forced out small enterprise. the state has also resisted the massive investments required to reverse the rapid decline in city transport, driving new and expanding businesses elsewhere in india. bangalore is a hub for indian biotechnology-related industry and in 2005 was home to around 47% of the 265 biotechnology companies in india, including biocon, india's largest biotechnology company, giving bangalore the nickname of the "biotech capital of india". bangalore is also the country's fourth largest fast-moving consumer goods (fmcg) market. forbes considers bangalore one of "the next decade's fastest-growing cities". the city is the third largest hub for high-net-worth individuals. as of 2007, it is home to over 10,000 millionaires who have an investment surplus of ₹45 million (us$563,551). as of 2017, bangalore was home to 7,700 millionaires and 8 billionaires, with a total wealth of $320 billion.
world trade center bangalore at rajajinagar
the city is widely regarded as the "silicon valley of asia", as the largest it hub of the continent. infosys, wipro, mindtree, mphasis, flipkart, myntra are headquartered in bangalore. information technology companies located in the city contributed 33% of india's ₹1,442 billion (us$20 billion) it exports in 2006–07. bangalore's it industry is divided into three main clusters: software technology parks of india (stpi); international tech park, bangalore (itpb); and electronic city. most of the it companies are located in  bommanahalli, domlur, whitefield, electronic city, krishnarajapuram, bellandur, mahadevapura.
