baranagar
History[edit]
history[edit]
dutch kuthi in baranagar
baranagar municipality was established in 1869; it is one of the oldest municipalities in india. the dutch had homes there in the seventeenth century. streynsham master who visited the area in 1676 spoke of the hog factory where about 3,000 hogs a year were slaughtered and salted for export. later it became the centre for the extensive jute trade, manufacturing gunny bags. a major road (surya sen road) parallel to the hooghly river connects baranagar bazaar with dakshineswar. in between temples such as kaancher mandir (i.e. glass temple), joy mitra kali bari and pathbari are located.
portuguese colonist first established their business camp here, which was in existence till 1862. dutch settlers established their ‘kuthi’ or office for business. dutch supremacy ended with the arisen of british power in bengal. m/s. colvin cow ii co. was the pioneer of industrial baranagar. they founded a sugar mill near alambazar. later george henderson founded borneo jute factory at that site. in 1859, the factory was renamed baranagar jute factory and is still in existence. the baranagar jute factory was the first mechanical jute factory in india. during the two world wars, many engineering factories were set up in baranagar, and the town became famous as industrial city. to provide civic amenities, north suburban municipality was formed in 1869 consisting of chitpur and cossipore (presently under kolkata m.c.), all mouzas of present baranagar municipal area along with kamarhati, ariadaha and dakshineswar mouzas of present kamarhati municipality. in 1881 north suburban municipality was divided into two parts, 1) cossipore- chitpur municipality (later amalgamated with kolkata municipal area) and 2) baranagar municipality. on 01.08.1899, kamarhati municipality was formed, parting kamarhati and ariadaha mouzas from baranagar. in 1949 dakshineswar mouza was parted from baranagar and merged with kamarhati municipality.
in kuthighat (baranagar), there is still an old house/lodge of nigerian merchants.
