bardhaman
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]
sarbamangala temple       108 shiva temple       hawa mahal (golapbag)       meghnad saha planetarium, golapbag, bardhaman       christ church       damodar river       curzon gate       inside view of the palace of burdwan maharaja       science centre       maa kankaleshwari at her temple       mazar of sufi pir baharam sakka       damodareshwar shiva temple, damodarpally, burdwan       burdwan arcade       damodar river
curzon gate – the curzon gate was built in 1902–1903, for the coronation of maharaja bijay chand mahatab. the former royal palace is located a kilometer from the gate. the pomp and grandeur of lord curzon's visit to bardhaman in 1904 established the name of the gate as curzon gate. it is also known as bijay toran. tombs of sher afgan and qutbuddin khan koka - mehr-un-nissa, then wife of sher afgan, jagirdar of bardhaman, was once a resident of bardhaman. it is said that the mughal emperor jahangir had fallen in love with her and was determined to marry her. he tried to get her with the help of his foster-brother and subahdar of bengal, qutbuddin khan koka. sher afgan died during a fight with qutbuddin khan koka, who also was killed. both were buried side by side at bardhaman in 1607 (or 1610 according to some sources), in the same place as pir baharam sikka, a persian sufi saint. mehr-un-nissa ultimately emerged as the empress nur jahan. rajbari – the palace of the bardhaman raj family, was built by mahatabchand in the 19th century, at a site that is earlier believed to have a mughal fort. the rajbari was built by the kolkata-based burn and company. the main hall has many valuable paintings. uday chand mahtab handed over the rajbati to the state government. it now houses the administrative offices of the university of burdwan. golapbag, ramna bagan and deer park – golapbag was developed as a botanical and zoological garden in the 19th century. it contained lakes for boating and hawa mahal. several academic sections of the university of burdwan are located there. ramna bagan once had a brahmo samaj. it now has a deer park. sarbamangala temple - the temple of sarbamangala, the presiding deity of the bardhaman raj and believed to have been found on the sand-bed of the damodar river. it is a navaratna temple with a nata mandir that has a terracotta durga panel. bardhamaneswar shiva temple - the shiva temple has a huge idol. many believe that the shiva lingam in the temple was established by chand sadagar of manasamangal fame. kamalakanta kalibari - it is a kali temple associated with the poet-devotee sadhak kamalakanta. 108 shiva temple complex - the shiva temple complex, constructed by maharani bishnu kumari, at nawabhat, near bardhaman, has a picturesque setting. the temple complex, built in 1788, fell into disrepairs and was thoroughly renovated by the birla public welfare trust. kankaleshwari mandir – the temple at kanchanagar, has a deity resembling a human skeleton. it is a navaratna temple with terracotta carvings. the idol is that of a six feet tall eight armed goddess chamunda. tomb of khwaja anwar berh -  the tomb of the mughal warrior, buried at poddarhat in 1315 hijri, is a fine example of mughal architecture. shershahi kalo masjid- the mosque in the puratan chak (payrakhana road) area was built during the reign of sher shah suri. shahi jumma masjid- the mosque with three minarets is a historical structure erected behind the rajbati by azim-ush-shan, grandson of aurangzeb and then subahdar of bengal, bihar and odisha. burdwan science centre- a high standard science museum near the university campus. meghnad saha planetarium- inaugurated in 1994, the main instrument was a gift from the government of japan to the university of burdwan. the second planetarium in the state, built to international standards, it is named after the indian scientist meghnad saha. located near golapbag, it has arrangement for six shows daily with 90 seats in each show. it is closed on mondays. birhata kalibari (boro maa): the temple of 10 feet sculpture of goddess kali made up of touchstone. the goddess is known locally as boro maa. the locality had been named after this temple as kali bazar. the temple has two parts bisected by a lane. one part contains kali mandir and the other, durga mandir. christ church: christ church bardhaman is a very church in bardhaman near "curzon gate". town hall : the town hall was built sometime between 1890 and 1894 and was handed to the municipality of bardhaman to help them preserve the remnants of lala bansogopal nandey. the municipality board restored the hall in 1990 to its present form of 2400 square feet from its earlier form of 704 square feet with a seating capacity of 485 seats.
