bareilly
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of bareilly
ahichchhatra (or ahi-kshetra) was the ancient capital of northern panchala. the remains of this city have been discovered in bareilly
according to the epic mahābhārata, the bareilly region (panchala) is said to be the birthplace of draupadi, who was also referred to as 'panchali' (one from the kingdom of panchāla) by kṛṣṇā (lord krishna). when yudhishthira becomes the king of hastinapur at the end of the mahābhārata, draupadi becomes his queen. the folklore says that gautama buddha had once visited the ancient fortress city of ahichchhatra in bareilly. the jain tirthankara parshva is said to have attained kaivalya at ahichchhatra. in a historic book (sikar ka itihaas) written by pt. jhabarmall sharma it is believed that the descendants of lord shriram's son kusha went from ayodhya to rohtas, narwar, gwalior and bareilly respectively their capital. in the 21st generation, maharaja nala, soddevji made gopachal (gwalior) the capital. the time of going to gwalior to bareilly looks like vikrama 933.
in the 12th century, the kingdom was under the rule by different clans of kshatriya rajputs. then the region became part of the muslim turkic delhi sultanate for 325 years before getting absorbed in the emerging mughal empire.  the foundation of the modern city of bareilly foundation was laid by mughal governor mukrand rai in 1657 during the rule of mughal emperor aurangzeb. later the region became the capital of rohilkhand region before getting handed over to nawab vazir of awadh and then to east india company (transferred to the british india) and later becoming an integral part of india. the region has, also, acted as a mint for a major part of its history.
from archaeological point of view the district of bareilly is very rich. the extensive remains of ahichchhatra, the capital town of northern panchala have been discovered near ramnagar village of aonla tehsil in the district. it was during the first excavations at ahichchhatra (1940–44) that the painted grey ware, associated with the advent of the aryans in the ganges–yamuna valley, was recognised for the first time in the earliest levels of the site.  nearly five thousand coins belonging to periods earlier than that of guptas have been yielded from ahichchhatra. it has also been one of the richest sites in india from the point of view of the total yield of terracotta. some of the masterpieces of indian terracotta art are from ahichchhatra. in fact the classification made of the terracotta human figurines from ahichchhatra on grounds of style and to some extent stratigraphy became a model for determining the stratigraphy of subsequent excavations at other sites in the ganges valley. on the basis of the existing material, the archaeology of the region helps us to get an idea of the cultural sequence from the beginning of the 2nd millennium bc up to the 11th century ad. some ancient mounds in the district have also been discovered by the deptt. of ancient history and culture, rohilkhand university, at tihar-khera (fatehganj west), pachaumi, rahtuia, kadarganj and sainthal. apart from this, artefacts of painted grey ware culture of the iron age have also been discovered near the city.
establishment [edit]
the mausoleum of hafiz rahmat khan at bareilly, 1814-15
bareilly was founded in 1537 by jagat singh katehriya, a rajput who named it bareilly  after his two sons bansaldev and baraldev. the city was mentioned by the historian budayuni. the foundation of the modern city of bareilly was laid by mughal governor mukrand rai in 1657. in 1658, bareilly became the headquarters of the province of budaun. the mughals encouraged the settlements of loyal afghans (pathans) in the bareilly region to control the rebellious katehriya rajputs. after the death of emperor aurangzeb, the afghans began to settle in the villages and assimilated with the local muslims. these descendants of these assimilated afghans are known as pathans. after the fall of the mughal empire, created anarchy and many pathans migrated from the rohilkhand region. bareilly (like other cities in uttar pradesh) experienced economic stagnation and poverty due to the breakdown of trade and security, leading to the migration of rohilla muslim pathans to suriname and guyana as indentured labour.
british east india company[edit]
under barech at the 1761 third battle of panipat, rohilkhand blocked the expansion of the maratha empire into northern india. in 1772 it was invaded by the marathas, repulsing the invasion with the aid of the nawab of awadh. after the war, nawab shuja-ud-daula demanded payment for the nawabs' help from barech. when his demand was refused, the nawab joined the east india company (under governor warren hastings and his commander-in-chief, alexander champion) to invade rohilkhand. the combined forces of daula and the company defeated barech (who was killed in battle at miranpur katra, ending rohilla rule) in 1774. rohilkhand was handed over to daula, and from 1774 to 1800 the province was ruled by the nawab of awadh who surrendered rohilkhand to the east india company in a treaty signed on 10 november 1801.  during the reign of shah alam ii, bareilly was the headquarters of rohilla sardar hafiz rehmat khan and many coins were minted. the city was later in the possession of awadh nawab asaf-ud-daulah, and his coins had bareilly, bareilly aasfabad and the bareilly kite and fish as identification marks. coins were then minted by the east india company.
modern period[edit]
theological seminary at bareilly, 1895
after the rohilla war, the change in the power structure increased discontent throughout the district.
the most popular trades in and around bareilly during the 1820s were manufacturing glass, jewellery, glass and lac bangles and gold and silver thread, crimping, bean drying, wire drawing, charpoy weaving, keeping a grocer's shop and selling kebabs.
rebellion of 1857 [edit]
bareilly was a centre of the indian rebellion of 1857. the rebellion began as a mutiny of indian soldiers (sepoys), employed in the three presidency armies, against race- and religion-based injustices and inequities on 10 may 1857 in meerut. it expanded into other mutinies and civilian rebellions, primarily in the major north-central indian river valleys; local episodes extended northwest to peshawar (on the northwest frontier with afghanistan) and southeast (beyond delhi). there were riots in many parts of uttar pradesh, and muslims in bareilly, bijnor and moradabad called for the revival of a muslim kingdom.
bareilly was made part of the united provinces of agra and oudh.
the rohillas actively opposed the british, but were later disarmed. khan bahadur khan rohilla, grandson of hafiz rahmat khan, formed his own government in bareilly in 1857 and a widespread popular revolt in awadh, bundelkhand and rohilkhand took place. in 1857, khan bhadur khan issued silver coins from bareilly as an independent ruler. when the rebellion failed, bareilly was subjugated. khan bahadur khan was sentenced to death, and hanged in the police station on 24 february 1860.
independence [edit]
bareilly central jail housed a number of political prisoners who supported the independence movement including yashpal (who married while imprisoned on 7 august 1936 was the first such ceremony in an indian jail). the rules were changed, preventing future prison marriages.
