bareilly
Transport [edit]
transport [edit]
roads [edit]
nh 530 connects bareilly with rampur.
bareilly lies on the national highway 30, which connects sitarganj in uttarakhand with vijaywada in andhra pradesh. the 2040 km (1267.5 mi) highway starts at the junction of nh 9 at sitarganj, and passes through bareilly, lucknow, allahabad, jabalpur and raipur to end at the junction of nh 65 in ibrahimpatnam suburb of vijaywada. other national highways originating in the city include nh 530 (bareilly–rampur highway), nh 530b (bareilly–mathura highway) and nh 730b (bareilly–bisalpur highway). the up state highway 37 (bareilly–nainital road) also originates in bareilly; so does the mdr29 w road, which connects bareilly to bilaspur via shahi and shishgarh.
arterial streets include:
stadium road (connecting pilibhit road (d.d. puram) to the shyamganj crossroad) macnair road (connecting nainital road to stadium road) pilibhit by-pass road, connecting pilibhit road to lucknow road (old national highway 24 or delhi-lucknow highway) sh-33 bareilly to mathura via subhash nagar & ( vishwanathpuram ), budaun and kasganj mini by-pass, connecting delhi road (old national highway 24 or delhi-lucknow highway) to nainital road shyam ganj– patel chowk choraha–chaupla–quila–c.b. ganj road (old national highway 24 or delhi-lucknow highway) shyam ganj–bareilly cantt–chowki chauraha–chaupla road i.v.r.i. road (connecting nainital road to pilibhit road) civil lines road highway connecting delhi to lucknow four lane via bareilly is a 29-kilometre-long (18 mi) highway which bypasses the city crowd of bareilly, ensuring the smooth running of local traffic.
a upsrtc bus in bareilly cantt.
bareilly is the headquarters of bareilly region of upsrtc, which has four depots and twelve stations under it. the city has two bus stations, from where inter-city buses operate. the bareilly bus station (old bus stand) located in civil lines caters to buses plying on routes towards the north, west and south of city i.e. on moradabad-delhi, haldwani-nainital, haridwar-dehradun and agra-jaipur routes; while the bareilly satellite bus station caters to bus services eastwards of the city notably to kanpur, lucknow, prayagraj and tanakpur. another bus station is proposed at izzatnagar. the bus station would be built over an area of 2.285 hectares and would cater to bus services towards delhi and uttarakhand.
improvements [edit]
as part of the expansion of old national highway 24 (connecting lucknow to new delhi via shahjahanpur, bareilly, rampur, moradabad and ghaziabad) to four lanes, two contracts were awarded on a design, build, finance, operate and transfer (dbfot) basis for the national highways authority of india (nhai). bareilly ring road (bypass) provides an excellent platform for setting up of industries, mncs, residential townships, shopping malls, school and colleges, hospitals, airport, railways, etc. government of uttar pradesh has proposed 200 km six lane expressway from faridpur near bareilly to pariyar in unnao district (near bithoor) to connect bareilly with kanpur and reduce distance between both cities from 10 hours to 3 hours.
city buses[edit]
city bus bareilly
city buses in bareilly are operated by the bareilly city transport services limited (bctsl). electric buses run on three routes in the city. a charging station-cum-depot for these buses is located in the swale nagar neighborhood of the city.
city bus services in bareilly were started initially on the kutubkhana-railway junction route by the uttar pradesh state road transport corporation. in the 1960s, a total of 4 buses used to ply on the urban routes, and in 1964, 6 new buses were introduced, increasing the number of buses to 10. by 1963–64 the bus services had been expanded from koharapeer to bhojipura and fatehganj. by the late 1970s, six private buses were operating in the city under the control of the upsrtc, with an average of 5000 daily commuters. however, gradual increase in the traffic on the city roads and the arrival of smaller vehicles resulted in the roadways bus services going into losses, and therefore the bus services were discontinued in the year 1990. at the time of their discontinuation, city buses used to operate from kutubkhana to railway junction, sadar cantt, sainthal, nawabganj, faridpur and fatehganj.
a proposal to restart city bus services in the city was initiated by bareilly municipal corporation in 2019 under the smart cities mission; 25 cng and electric buses were proposed to ply on five routes with a depot at ramganga nagar. approval to operate ac electric buses in the city was granted by state cabinet in december 2019. construction of a charging station for the electric buses commenced in swale nagar in 2020, and was completed in september 2021. the electric buses were inaugurated on 4 january 2022.
rail [edit]
izzatnagar is the divisional headquarters of one of the three divisions of north eastern railways.
now, bareilly junction lies on lucknow-moradabad line and lucknow-sitapur-lakhimpur-pilibhit-bareilly-kasganj line. bareilly has been connected to the rest of india by rail since the 19th century, and a 1909 map shows that bareilly was a railway junction during the early 20th century. six rail lines intersect in the city. after the british indian government purchased the indian branch railway on 31 march 1872, and renamed the lucknow–kanpur main line as the oudh and rohilkhand railway, railway services started to expand towards the west of lucknow. the construction of a railway line from lucknow to sandila and then further onwards to hardoi was completed in 1872. this line was further extended to bareilly on 1 november 1873. prior to that, another railway line connecting moradabad to chandausi had already been built in 1872; it too was extended to bareilly, the construction completed on 22 december 1873.
a new railway line connecting bareilly and moradabad via rampur, called the bareilly–moradabad chord, was approved on 4 december 1891, and was completed by 8 june 1894. on 8 december 1894, the main line was officially diverted to this chord, while the older line was renamed the chandausi loop. in 1890 the bengal and north western railway leased the tirhoot state railway to increase the latter's revenue, and the lucknow-sitapur-seramow provincial state railway merged with the bareilly-pilibheet provincial state railway to form the lucknow-bareilly railway on 1 january 1891. the lucknow-bareilly railway was owned by the government of india, and operated by the rohilkund and kumaon railway.
the oudh and tirhut railway was formed on 1 january 1943 by the merger of the bengal and north western railway, the tirhut railway (bnw operated), the mashrak-thawe extension railway (bnw operated), the rohilkund and kumaon railway and the lucknow-bareilly railway (r&k operated). the oudh and tirhut railway was later renamed the oudh tirhut railway; it merged with the assam railway and the kanpur-achnera section of the bombay, baroda and central india railway to form north eastern railway (headquartered in gorakhpur, with a divisional headquarters in izzatnagar), one of the 16 zones of the indian railways.
bareilly junction is among the top 100 booking stations of indian railways
several railway stations serve the city including:
bareilly cantt (station code: bryc) bareilly city (station code: bc) bareilly junction (station code: be) bhojipura junction (station code: bpr) c.b. ganj (station code: cbj) dohna (station code: dox) izzatnagar (station code: izn) parsa khera (station code: pkra) ramganga bridge (station code: rgb)
bareilly is on the moradabad-lucknow route. trains from the north (including jammu tawi and amritsar) and delhi running east and northeast (to gorakhpur, barauni, howrah, guwahati and dibrugarh) pass through bareilly, and the city is also on the route from uttarakhand to agra and mathura via budaun. many trains to railway stations in uttarakhand pass through bareilly.
air[edit]
bareilly city is served by the bareilly airport (iata: bek, icao: viby) – a civil enclave at the indian air force's 'trishul air base' in izzatnagar, 6 kilometres (3.7 mi) north of the city centre.
the airports authority of india approved construction of a passenger terminal at the bareilly civil enclave in 2016. 10 hectares (25 acres) of land was bought from local farmers by the district administration for the project. the aai began the tender process to award construction contracts for the airport in september 2017 and expected the civil enclave to be ready by march 2018, pending uttar pradesh government approval. however, the iaf requested changes in the layout of the taxiway connecting the terminal to the runway. after the ministry of defence approved the taxiway, passenger service was hoped to begin by february 2019.
bareilly airport was inaugurated by state civil aviation minister nand gopal nandi and union minister santosh gangwar on 10 march 2019 at the civil enclave of trishul air base. the terminal building can handle 75 passengers during the peak hour. flight services from bareilly to delhi commenced on 8 march 2021.
