bareilly
Administration and politics[edit]
administration and politics[edit]
general administration[edit]
bareilly division consists of four districts, and is headed by the divisional commissioner of bareilly, who is an ias officer. the commissioner is the head of local government institutions (including municipal corporations) in the division, is in charge of infrastructure development in his division, and is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the division. the district magistrate of bareilly reports to the divisional commissioner.
bareilly district administration is headed by the district magistrate and collector (dm) of bareilly, who is an ias officer. the dm is in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government and oversees the elections held in the city. the dm is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the city. the dm is assisted by a chief development officer; two additional district magistrates; one city magistrate; and four additional city magistrates.
civic administration[edit]
the municipal board of bareilly was established on 24 june 1858 under the north-west provinces and oudh act xxvi of 1850. it was then a municipal committee, which was constituted by nominated members headed by the district magistrate, who was its ex-officio chairman. seven of the nine nominated members were british including the magistrate. later, the north-west provinces and oudh municipal improvements act of 1868 (act vi of '68) recommended the elective principle, which was duly implemented. however, the district magistrate still remained the chairman of this committee. the members continued to be nominated by the government until the year 1868, when the elective principle was partially adopted - 27 members now came through election process, while 9 members were still nominated by the government. this system continued until 1900 when, under the act of 1900, the number of nominated members was changed to 6 and the number of elected members became 18. nominated members were reduced to 3 by the municipality act of 1916 while the number of elected members was increased to 19. major changes were introduced in 1963; all members of the 48-member committee were now elected, and the system of nomination was abolished. the term of the board was usually 6 years.
politics[edit]
santosh gangwar is chairperson of the committee on public undertakings. he was six times bareilly mp from 1989 to 2009 continuously and now 2 times again from 2014 to present.
the 16th lok sabha election for the bareilly mp was won by santosh gangwar of the bharatiya janata party. he defeated praveen singh aron by huge margin to retain his stronghold. bareilly has been a traditional battleground between the inc and the saffron parties. regional parties such as the samajwadi party, led by veerpal singh yadav, and the bahujan samaj party have a limited influence.
bareilly was a stronghold of the bharatiya janata party (bjp) for 20 years (1989–2009), when both the member of parliament (mp) and the member of the legislative assembly (mla) was from the bjp. the city saw the emergence of hindu nationalism during the last two decades, accompanied by the growth of rashtriya swayamsevak sangh, vishva hindu parishad and bajrang dal in the region.
santosh gangwar was a member of parliament for bareilly for 20 years (1989–2009). he was a former minister of state for petroleum and natural gas, with an additional charge of parliament affairs in the 13th lok sabha. before this, gangwar was minister of state of science and technology with an additional charge of parliamentary affairs from october to november 1999 and chief whip of the bjp in the 14th lok sabha. he was narrowly defeated in the 15th lok sabha elections in 2009. he was elected again as a member of parliament in 2014 and was selected on 27 may 2014 onwards as the union minister of state (independent charge) ministry of textile; ministry of parliamentary affairs; and ministry of water resources, river development and ganga rejuvenation[8][9]
in may 2019, gangwar became the minister of state (independent charge) for labour and employment.santosh gangwar resigned from his post on 7 july 2021, ahead of the reshuffle in the modi cabinet. he is currently the chaiperson of the committee on public undertakings.
law and order[edit]
the bareilly zone (shown in orange), one of the 8 zones of the up police, is headquartered in the city.
bareilly city comes under the bareilly zone and bareilly range of the uttar pradesh police; both of which are headquartered in the city. the bareilly zone is headed by an indian police service (ips) officer of additional director general (adg) rank, while the bareilly range is headed by an inspector general (ig) rank ips officer. the adg, bareilly zone is avinash chandra, and ig, bareilly range is ramit sharma.
police force in the bareilly district is headed by a senior superintendent (ssp) rank police officer, who is practically responsible for maintaining law and order in the district. the ssp is assisted in this task by four additional superintendent (asp) rank officers - sp city looks after the functioning of police stations and law and order in the urban areas, while sp rural looks after the functioning of the police stations apart from taking care of law and order in the rural areas of the district. sp traffic takes care of traffic arrangements throughout the district and sp crime oversees criminal investigations that require in-depth analysis. under these several officers, circle officers (co) of the rank of deputy superintendent (dsp) take care of the responsibilities of the police stations allotted to them. five circle officers come under the supervision of sp rural while four officers come under sp city and one co traffic comes under sp traffic. apart from this, one co lines is also posted in bareilly.
there are a total of 29 police stations in bareilly district. one sho is stationed at the bareilly kotwali while other police stations in the district are headed by an so. there are various outposts (chowkis) under the police stations where officials of the rank of head constable and constable are stationed along with the beat officers, who are usually on rounds in the areas under them. in addition to the regular police force, reserve forces are also deployed with reserve equipments in the reserve police lines located near choupla bareilly. they report directly to the ssp. co liu takes care of the local intelligence by giving regular inputs to the police and magistracy. two police control rooms are situated in bareilly - the district control room looks after the rural areas of bareilly while the city control room takes care of the urban areas. additionally they help in coordinating and carrying out of communication throughout the district. there is also a women's police station under co-1st in bareilly for action on crimes and issues related to women.
bareilly has a district court under the high court of judicature of allahabad. the court is headed by the district judge of bareilly, who is assisted by numerous additional district judges, civil judges (senior division) and additional civil judges. sm. renu agarwal is presently posted as the district & sessions judge at bareilly.
