bareilly
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
b.l. agro refinery at parsakhera. the parsakhera industrial estate was established by upsidc in 1980.
since india began liberalising its economy, bareilly has experienced rapid growth. commerce has diversified with mall culture, although the area's rural economy remains agrarian, handicraft (zari-zardosi embroidery work on cloth material), bamboo and cane furniture. the city is equidistant from new delhi (national capital) and lucknow, the capital of uttar pradesh. this makes bareilly a nodal point between two major cities of india.
bareilly was a flourishing cotton centre in early nineteenth century. there were about 20,000 looms in the city in 1802, with a production value of rs 30,00,000 per year. robert glyn, the then magistrate of bareilly asked ghulam yahya to write an account of "craftsmen, the names of tools of manufacture and production and their dress and manners". the most popular trades in and around bareilly during the 1820s were manufacturing glass, jewellery, glass and lac bangles and gold and silver thread, crimping, bean drying, wire drawing, charpoy weaving, keeping a grocer's shop and selling kebabs.
abandoned rubber factory at fatehganj. the factory closed down on 15 july 1999.
the city witnessed rapid growth in trade and commerce, transport and other socio-economic activities after the construction of railway lines in the early twentieth century. several factories, including the national brewery company, a match factory, an ice factory and a steam-powered flour mill were established in the city in first decade of the century. the indian wood products limited was established in izzatnagar in 1919, where catechu was produced on a large scale. a number of industries such as the indian turpentine & rosin (founded in 1926) and the western indian match company (wimco; founded in 1937) were also established at c.b. ganj, located at a distance of 8 km from the city center. hr sugar factory was established in nekpur in 1932. as a result, bareilly emerged as a major industrial and commercial area of the region by the 1940s, with many banks and educational institutions being established in every corner of the city.
iffco plant at aonla
the industrial development of the city continued after the independence of india in 1947 and small scale industries related to khandsari, furniture, engineering and oil extraction began to take shape in shahamatganj and nai basti. industrial estates were established by the up state industrial development corporation (upsidc) in cb ganj in 1958, bhojipura in 1979 and in parsakhera in 1980.  cb ganj and ijjat nagar had by this time established themselves as major industrial and industrial-cum-transport centers of the city respectively, while the shahamatganj and qila markets were among the largest in bareilly and surrounding areas. by the 1960s and 1980s, several markets were built around residential areas located on the qutubkhana-railway junction road, of which subhash market, chaupula, punjabi and kishore markets were among the prominent ones. according to the 1971 census of india, bareilly was a city board of ist category, and was ranked 9th in the state by importance. the economy here relied on the industrial-cum-service sector; a large number of workers were engaged in activities that were closely related either to industry or to tertiary sectors.
by the end of the 1990s many industries in the city were shut down. the indian turpentine & rosin factory (itr) was shut down in april 1998 and the sugar mill of nekpur ceased production in september 1998. the mill, which was under the control of the up sugar corporation had been awarded a gold medal for producing sugar more than the set target in the year 1997 itself. a rubber factory situated in fatehganj west was also closed on 15 july 1999. the products of the factory were famous all over asia, and about two thousand people were serving in this factory. the wimco factory in cb ganj, which used to supply matches across the country, was shut down in 2014. indian farmers fertiliser cooperative (iffco) has a large plant at aonla (30 km). the plant was commissioned in 1988 and expanded in 1996. it produces ammonia and urea.
bareilly has very productive land (tarai) for growing sugarcane, rice, pulses & wheat. hindustan unilever has begun growing rice in bareilly and the punjab, but the company desires legal reforms and facility construction. in 2009, uttar pradesh power corporation limited (uppcl) awarded pilot contracts to supply power to nine cities to companies who will collect revenue for the state government. bareilly, agra, kanpur, moradabad and gorakhpur will be part of the first phase. the indian government initiated a 10-percent-ethanol-blending programme on a pilot basis in bareilly and belgaum in karnataka. the city also has cng and liquid petroleum gas (lpg) outlets. bareilly district was the first to implement india's bio-fuel standard.*i
