batala
Notable people[edit]
notable people[edit]

this article's list of residents may not follow wikipedia's verifiability policy. please improve this article by removing names that do not have independent reliable sources showing they merit inclusion in this article and are residents, or by incorporating the relevant publications into the body of the article through appropriate citations. (june 2022)
shiv kumar batalvi – poet, singer mumtaz mufti – renowned pakistani writer, philosopher and psychologist, awarded the high pakistani civilian award sitara-e-imtiaz and munshi premchand award. mian din muhammad – maharaja ranjit singhs ambassador to peshawar, his counsellor and tutor of prince sher singh. later he became revenue minister of mahraja sher singh. kucha din muhammad is a locality in batala named after him. mian ghulam farid khan – extra-assistant commissioner (revenue) in british indian government and honorary magistrate of batala. awarded title of khan bahadur on 1891 by the british government.[1] mian muhammad said – officer of imperial police. served as superintendent of police lahore and inspector-general kapurthala state. awarded title of khan bahadur on 1923 by the viceroy and governor-general. [2] mian ahmed said – deputy-post master general of punjab and nwfp. awarded title of khan bahadur on 1946 by the viceroy and governor-general. bhupinder singh mann – ex member of parliament (rajya sabha from 1990 to 1996), nominated by president of india for outstanding contribution to the cause of indian farmers. prabhjot singh – hockey player of indian men's hockey team. gurpartap singh mann – member of punjab public service commission (ppsc) surjit singh randhawa – hockey player of indian men's hockey team. dev anand – he studied at batala, dharamshala and lahore before partition. mohini hameed – pakistani radio broadcaster, anchor and actress. sardar jassa singh ramgarhia - sikh misaldar and ruler of batala during sikh misl period. syed mian nazar mohiuddin (1882-1961) - was the head of an old prestigious family of batala known as the mians of batala. and descended from syed fazil ud din.
his son son badar mohiuddin (1905-1987) became an elected member of punjab legislative assembly in the 1930s. syed badar mohiuddin's son and successor syed altaf mohiuddin became an elected member of the punjab assembly in pakistan.  syed nazar mohiuddin's son najm hosain syed (born 1935) is an eminent poet, critic, playwright and translator of punjabi language whose numerous books have been published from lahore. some of them have been transcribed into punjabi script and published in india.
