batala
Landmarks[edit]
landmarks[edit]

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (february 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
located in gurdaspur district, 38 kilometres (24 mi) from amritsar on the kashmir grand trunk road. one of the older towns in the province of lahore in earlier times, batala is home to many monuments of religious and historic importance, such as hazira park, barah dari, hakikat samadh. these monuments are connected with sikh history and the mughal period. the city consists of several churches constructed during the british raj.
jal mahal (baradari)[edit]
the jal mahal and the palace of maharaja sher singh were built by the maharaja (ce 1780–1839). the palace is under the control of the authorities of the local baring union christian college. the administrative offices of the college are housed in it. jal mahal is under the control of the archaeological survey of india (asi). jal mahal (baradari) and the palace of maharaja sher singh were connected through a tunnel. according to some senior citizens, shamsher khan tank of jal mahal used to be filled with water through the tunnel, which was further connected to a long tunnel (canal) to the beas, near kahnuwan. the remnants of the tunnel can be seen near baring christian college.
maharaja sher singh used to hold meetings of his courtiers in jal mahal. the water reservoir was built by shamsher khan while the beautiful baradari in the centre of the tank was constructed by maharaja sher singh. it has a square room in the centre of a pavilion with a passageway. the entry to the first floor is by a staircase with concave-shaped steps on the north-eastern canal. jal mahal has eight doors in the lower part of the building and four in the upper storey. the inner wall contained beautiful art glass carvings and wall paintings. however, major parts of the paintings have been erased or damaged. the roof of the pavilion has also fallen. the municipal council provided a tubewell to fill up the tank till the eighties. all sides of the reservoir were lined with nanakshahi bricks. however, with the passage of time the brick lining has been destroyed. nowadays, on one side of the tank is located a vridh ashram owned and managed by the dainik prarthana sabha. there also exists bhadr kali mandir and shivala. the upper portion of jal mahal is in a dilapidated condition and the time is not far when this magnificent structure will pass into oblivion.
gurdwara kandh sahib[edit]
gurudwara kandh sahib
guru nanak dev ji was married here to bibi sulakhani ji. he was engaged to the daughter of mul chand chauna who along with the brahmin priests insisted on a traditional hindu marriage while guru nanak dev ji wanted a simple marriage. guru nanak dev ji was sitting beside a crooked mud wall (kandh) discussing the marriage plans with the brahmin clergy. it was planned to push the wall on top of the guru but guru nanak dev ji was warned of the plan by an old woman. guru nanak dev ji just smiled and said "this wall will not fall for centuries. the will of god shall prevail." the wall is still preserved within the gurdwara and a celebration is held here every year on the anniversary of guru nanak's marriage. at walking distance of two minutes there is gurudwara dera sahib, which was house of mata sulakhni ji (bride of guru nanak dev ji). an ancient well is situated in gurudwara dera sahib, it is said that water of well is having special curing powers in itself.
kali dwara mandir[edit]
photo of kalidwara mandir
another very famous and the most-visited devotional place here is the temple dedicated to goddess kali. it's situated in the heart of city i.e., chakri bazar and maximum rush is seen on tuesdays. during navratri time, a lot of people from city and surrounding region visit the temple. people of batala and outside have true faith on mata kali dwara mandir. many other temples are also situated in batala city.
sati lakshmi devi smadh[edit]
fountain in smadh park
sati laxmi devi smarak is located in the smadh road of batala opposite to hanuman akahara, the smadh of sati lakshmi devi is there, who was engaged to veer hakikat rai, when laxmi devi heard the news of death of her becoming husband, she became sati (throw herself in fire and burn to death), her age was 10 years at that time, on that place a big public park is made by local people on the smadhis of veer haqiqat rai and sati lakshmi devi, reason for the death of veer haqiqat rai is mentioned below|:
haqiqat rai puri was born into a hindu family, in sialkot, punjab, mughal india with his caste being a puri khatri.[6] his father's name was bagh mal rai, a hindu trader. at the age of 14, rai was sent to a maulvi to learn persian. one day some of his muslim classmates were making fun of various hindu deities, ridiculing his religion. in return he asked them how they would feel if anyone insulted muhammad or ayesha. for this, his classmates reported this to the maulvi as it was taken as an insult of islam.
as a result, he was taken to lahore (then a provincial capital in the mughal empire), where he was given the option to convert to islam to save his life, but he refused. as a result, he was beheaded at the age of 14, during the governorship of zakariya khan. quasi abdul haq, who was responsible for the fatwa, was also beheaded later by sardar dal singh and saradar mana singh and shown around the city of batala

