bathinda
Education[edit]
education[edit]
college education[edit]
colleges within bathinda include:
central university of punjab
adesh university adesh institute of medical sciences and research akal university, talwandi sabo dav college, bathinda government rajindra college, bathinda guru kashi university bathinda college of law institute of hotel management, catering technology and applied nutrition, bathinda
dav college, bathinda[edit]
established in 1969, the college is a pioneer of education in the region.
central university of punjab[edit]
central university of punjab, bathinda
the central university of punjab bathinda (punjab) has been established through the central universities act 2009 which received the assent of the president of india on 20 march 2009. its territorial jurisdiction extends to the whole state of punjab.
it started its functioning from camp office in april 2009, which happens to be the residence of the vice chancellor, and from november 2009 it shifted to its city campus spread over an area of 35 acres. construction of the main campus has started on 540 acres of land in ghudda village (21.5 km from bathinda isbt) on badal road. engineers india limited, a navratna public sector undertaking, is providing pmc services for the project.
maharaja ranjit singh punjab technical university[edit]
maharaja ranjit singh punjab technical university (mrsptu), formerly maharaja ranjit singh state technical university, is a state technical university of punjab located in bathinda, punjab, india. it was established in 2015 and has jurisdiction over 11 districts namely bathinda, ferozepur, moga, faridkot, sri muktsar sahib, barnala, mansa, sangrur, patiala, fatehgarh sahib and fazilka. university will function from upgraded giani zail singh punjab technical university campus.
adesh institute of medical science and research[edit]
adesh institute of medical sciences & research (aimsr) is a private not for profit medical college associated with a 750-bed tertiary care teaching hospital. it has 150 m.b.b.s. annual seat intake. the college is located on the barnala bathinda highway. the college was established in 2006 under adesh institutions. aimsr is approved by medical council of india and permitted by ministry of health & family welfare. it was affiliated to baba farid university of health sciences, faridkot from 2006 to 2011 mbbs admissions batch and is affiliated to adesh university, bathinda starting 2012.
