begusarai
Culture
culture
the culture of begusarai is the cultural heritage of mithila. begusarai is also famous for simaria, a fair of devotional significance every year in the month of kartik according to the indian panchang, (usually during november). men and women in begusarai are very religious and dress for the festivals as well. the costumes of begusarai stem from the rich traditional culture of mithila. panjabi kurta and dhoti with a maroon gamchha with mithila painting border and red bengali gamchha are common clothing items for men. men wear gold ring in their nose which symbolizes prosperity, happiness and wealth inspired by lord vishnu.  also wear balla on their wrist. in ancient times there was no colour option in mithila, so the maithil women wore white or yellow saree with red border but now they have a lot of variety and colour options, and wear laal-paara (the traditional red-boarded white or yellow sari) on some special occasions, and also wear shakha-pola  with lahthi in their hand. in mithila culture, this represents new beginnings, passion and prosperity. red also represents the hindu goddess durga, a symbol of new beginnings and feminine power. during chhaith, the women of begusarai wear pure cotton dhoti without stitching which reflects the pure, traditional culture of mithila. usually crafted from pure cotton for daily use and from pure silk for more glamorous occasions, traditional attire for the women of begusarai includes jamdani, banorisi and bhagalpuri and many more. many festivals are celebrated throughout the year in begusarai. chhaith and durga puja is celebrated as perhaps the most important of all the celebrations of begusarai.
here is a list of the main festivals of begusarai:
chhaith: prayers during chhath puja are dedicated to the solar deity, surya, to show gratitude and thankfulness saama-chakeba: includes folk theater and song, celebrates the love between brothers and sisters and is based on a legend recounted in the puranas. aghaniya chhaith (chhotka pabni): very popular with the name of "chhotka-pabni" and dopaharka aragh in mithila.celebrated in aghan shukla-paksha shasthi tithi. baisakkha chhaith (chhotka pabni): this is celebrated in month of baishakh shukla-paksha shasthi tithi and it is also called chhotka-pabni(dopaharka aragh) in mithila. chaurchan: along with lord ganesha, lord vishnu, goddess parvati and the moon god is worshipped. the story of chorchan puja is also heard on this day after that arghya is offered to the moon god (chandra deva). jitiya: celebrated mainly in indian states of bihar, jharkhand and uttar pradesh and nepal; mothers fast (without water) for wellbeing of their children. vivaha panchami: hindu festival celebrating the wedding of rama and sita. it is observed on the fifth day of the shukla paksha or waxing phase of moon in the agrahayana month (november – december) as per maithili calendar and in the month of margashirsha in the hindu calendar. sita navami ganga dussehra: ganga dussehra, also known as gangavataran, is a hindu festival celebrated by maithils in mokshdhaam simaria dhaam (the welcome gate of mithila). avatarana (descent) of the ganges. it is believed by hindus that the holy river ganges descended from heaven to earth on this day. kalpwas: celebrated in every kartik month in simaria dhaam, begushorai. kojagiri (lachhmi puja): harvest festival marking the end of monsoon season paata puja (durga maay aagmon) khutti puja (ritual of durga puja) mohalaya durga puja: a ten-day festival, of which the last five are of the most significance. is an important festival in the shaktism tradition of hinduism. it marks the victory of goddess durga in her battle against the shape-shifting asura, mahishasura. thus, the festival epitomizes the victory of good over evil, though it is also in part a harvest festival celebrating the goddess as the motherly power behind all of life and creation. kali puja: dedicated to the hindu goddess kali, celebrated on the new moon day dipannita amavasya of the hindu month kartik saraswati puja: marks the preparation for the arrival of spring. the festival is celebrated by people of dharmic religions in the south asian countries in different ways depending on the region. vasant panchami also marks the start of preparation for holika and holi, which take place forty days later. rama navami: celebrates the descent of vishnu as the rama avatar, through his birth to king dasharatha and queen kausalya in ayodhya, kosala. basanti puja (chaiti durga puja) til sakraait aakhar bochhor pahun shashthi naag panchami barsaait vishwakarma puja holi
