belgaum
Belgaum border dispute
belgaum border dispute

main article: belgaum border dispute
map of the bombay presidency including belgaum
the belgaum border dispute is a dispute involving the indian states of karnataka and maharashtra. belgaum, currently a part of karnataka and earlier the erstwhile bombay presidency, is claimed by maharashtra on linguistic grounds. in 1956, the states reorganization act incorporated the belgaum district including the 10 taluks in the mysore state, which became karnataka in 1973. though according to the 1881 census, 64.39% of the population of belgaum were kannada speakers and 26.04% spoke marathi.
in 1948, the maharashtra ekikaran samiti, a belgaum based regional organisation fighting for the merger, was formed. on 17 january 1956, marathi activists against the inclusion were shot by the police forces of mysore state. since then, 17 january is observed as the 'martyr's day' by maharashtra ekikaran samiti.
on 11 november 2005, karnataka rakshna vedike (krv) activists daubed belgaum mayor vijay more's face with black paint (and later surrendered to the police) in the wake of belgaum city corporation (bcc) passing a resolution to include the district of belgaum into maharashtra, a neighbouring state. upon his return to belgaum, vijay more was served with several show-cause notices by the government of karnataka and later dissolved the council.
following this incident, in the following year's election, prashanta budavi, wife of krv (karnataka rakshana vedike) city president shantinath budavi was appointed as mayor of the belgaum city corporation. maharashtra has asked to bring 865 disputed villages including belgaum under centre's rule until supreme court's final verdict. n.d. patil, head of legal-committee appointed by maharashtra government said that karnataka is intensifying the problem. he added that marathi people of border region are not able to live with honour and dignity under karnataka's rule pointing out to the 'unconstitutional' dissolution of belgaum city corporation and manhandling of belgaum mayor by kannada activists at bangalore.
in 2019, deputy cm of maharashtra ajit pawar called for the incorporation of belgaum along with karwar and nipani area in maharashtra citing it was of dream of shiv sena founder bal thackeray, a statement reiterated by cm uddhav thackeray in january 2021. thackeray went on to term the region as 'karnataka-occupied areas'. the case regarding the dispute is pending before the supreme court for many years.
