belgaum
Defence training centres
defence training centres
belgaum's salubrious climate, proximity to the coast and strategic position near portuguese goa commended it to the british as a suitable location for an army training centre and cantonment, which it continues to be today for the indian armed forces, along with an air force station of the indian air force. the british had a sizeable infantry post here, having realised the military importance of its geographical location.
development of a rail network for movement of resources and later troops was one of the means employed by both the east india company and the british to exert control over india. belgaum houses the maratha light infantry regimental centre (mlirc). it also houses the commando training wing which is a part of the junior leaders wing (formerly known as infantry school,belgaum). this establishment is affiliated to the infantry school, mhow. herein, infantry officers and soldiers are trained in endurance, escape and evasion, guerrilla and commando warfare techniques and to live off the land. the commando course at belgaum is mandatory for all infantry officers. officers of other branches of the military and even some foreign officers undertake the course, upon being nominated to do so. in between the military hospital and the junior leaders wing lies the belgaum military school, established in 1945 spread over an area of 64 acres (26 ha). the school provides quality education to sons of wards of servicemen and ex servicemen of the armed forces. several of them go on to join the national defence academy.
the indo-tibetan border police, itbp, is building a full-fledged recreation and training centre in belgaum at halbhavi. belgaum provides an excellent climate for recreation and itbp will have large family bases in belgaum for its soldiers after high altitude stressful duty.
the central reserve police force institute of elite central paramilitary forces is setting up a national-level training institution (for jungle warfare) at khanapur in belgaum. the establishment, called the cobra school of jungle warfare is already operational.
