berhampore
Education[edit]
education[edit]
among the government-aided high schools for boys, krishnath college school, berhampore, berhampore j.n. academy, iswar chandra institution (ici), gurudas tarasundari institution (gti) and saidabad manindra chandra vidyapith (mcv) are the most popular ones.
the high school for girls include berhampore maharani kashiswari girls high school, mahakali pathshala, shrish chandra vidyapith and lipika memorial girls' high school.
all the above-mentioned schools are affiliated with state bengal board and are bengali medium schools.
there are also private schools like gitaram academy, prabharani public school, mary immaculate school, don bosco school,  viddyottam public school which are affiliated with the central board of secondary education or indian certificate of secondary education|council for indian school certificate examinations are english medium schools.
the city also has a kendriya vidyalaya, situated close to babul bona road, the first secondary batch having graduated from the school in 2001.
jawahar navodaya vidyalaya is in swarnomoyee road near berhampore court station.
university[edit]
murshidabad university
colleges[edit]
berhampore college was initially founded in 1963 as raja krishnath college of commerce, and was renamed in 1975. it is located in berhampore. berhampore girls' college was established at berhampore in 1946. central sericultural research and training institute is a research station conducted by the central silk board, ministry of textiles, government of india, established at berhampore in 1943. it conducts a regular post-graduate course in sericulture and tailor-made courses. government college of engineering & textile technology, berhampore was established at berhampore in 1927. krishnath college (named berhampore college until 1902) was established at berhampore in 1853. in addition to undergraduate courses it offers post-graduate courses in physiology, sericulture and sanskrit. murshidabad college of engineering & technology was established at berhampore in 1998. murshidabad institute of technology was established in 1956. murshidabad medical college and hospital was established at berhampore in 2012.

this article contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. please help to clean it up to meet wikipedia's quality standards. where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (september 2017)
monarch college of art and technology is a private college at berhampore offering courses in animation film making and ceramic design. prabharani public school was established on the outskirts of berhampore in 2003. the school is part of kalyan bharti trust, which has bengali medium schools, b.ed. colleges along with this cbse school. union christian training college was established at berhampore in 1938. it is affiliated with the west bengal university of teachers' training, education planning and administration for its bed course, and with the university of kalyani for its bped course.
