berhampore
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
baharmpur railway station, murshidabad
rail – berhampore is 186 km from kolkata by train. the train station is named as berhampore court (bpc), and it stands on the sealdah–lalgola line of the eastern railway. main trains are the bhagirathi express (13103/13104), hazarduari express (13113/13114), and dhano dhanye express (13117/13118). other passenger trains include sealdah–lalgola passenger, sealdah–berhampore court memu passenger, ranaghat jn–lalgola emu locals, krishnanagar city jn–lalgola emu locals. in the northern part of the town there is another railway station named cossimbazar, which is the next railway station on the sealdah–lalgola route.
khagraghat road (kgle) station stands on the howrah–azimganj junction line of the eastern railway. main trains of this line are sealdah–new alipurduar teesta–torsa express, howrah–dibrugarh kamrup express, kolkata–radhikapur express, hatey bazare express, howrah–malda town intercity express, puri–kamakhya express via howrah, digha–new jalpaiguri paharia express, and nabadwip dham–malda town express.
road – as berhampore is the administrative headquarters of the murshidabad district and as it stands just in a central position of west bengal, it acts as the link between north bengal and south bengal. this town is well connected by nh 12 and national highway 34. the local transportation dependent on rickshaws and e-rickshaws (known as tuk-tuk or toto car). there are bus services on regular basis from south bengal to north bengal and vice versa.
there are two bus terminals in the city – one for the government bus services and the other bus terminus for private buses is called 'mohona'. there are regular bus services to kolkata (esplanade). bus services are also available to other parts of west bengal such as durgapur, sainthia, siuri, asansol, burdwan, bankura, jhargram, bolpur, rampurhat, nalhati, kirnahar, malda, siliguri, balurghat, gangarampur, krishnanagar, ranaghat. bus service is also available to dumka (jharkhand).
water – berhampore city is situated on the banks of bhagirathi. berhampore north to berhampore south is connected via launchboats. regular boat transport is also available from berhampore to other towns of murshidabad such as azimganj and jiaganj.
