bettiah
History[edit]
history[edit]
ghanta ghar of bettiah raj palace
in 1244 a.d., gangeshwar dev, a bhumihar brahmin of "jaitharia" clan, settled at jaithar in champaran. one of his descendants, agar sen, acquired large territory in the reign of emperor jehangir and was bestowed the title of 'raja' by emperor shah jahan. in 1659, he was succeeded by his son raja guj singh, who built the palace of the family at bettiah. he died in 1694 a.d. the palace stands today but serves as marketplace.
in 1765, when the east india company acquired the diwani, bettiah raj held the largest territory under its jurisdiction. it consisted of all of champaran except for a small portion held by the ram nagar raj (also held by bhumihar family).
maharaja sir harendra kishore singh was the last king of bettiah raj. he was born in 1854 and succeeded his father, the late maharaja rajendra kishore singh bahadur in 1883. in 1884, he received the title of maharaja bahadur as a personal distinction and a khilat and a sanad from the hands of the lieutenant governor of bengal, sir augustus rivers thompson. he was created a knight commander of the most eminent order of the indian empire on 1 march 1889. he was appointed a member of the legislative council of bengal in january 1891. he was also a member of the asiatic society. he was the last ruler of bettiah raj.  maharaja sir harendra kishore singh bahadur died heirless on 26 march 1893, leaving behind two widows, maharani sheo ratna kunwar and maharani janki kunwar. there are a few institutions named after the queen maharani janki kunwar, such as m.j.k college and m.j.k hospital. the bettiah gharana was one of the oldest style of vocal music. madhuban was part of the erstwhile 'bettiah raj'. internal disputes and family quarrels divided the bettiah raj in course of time. madhuban raj was created as a consequence.
a section of dhrupad singers of dilli gharana (delhi gharana) from mughal emperor shah jahan’s court had migrated to bettiah under the patronage of bettiah raj and thus was sown the seed of bettiah gharana. the famous dagar brothers had praised the bettiah dhrupad singers and some of them were invited to the bharat bhavan in bhopal to perform with other accomplished singers in 1990.
on 26 december 2020, bettiah became a municipal corporation. it includes tola san saraiya, banuchapar, kargahiya east and nearby area for its upgradation.
