bhagalpur
Notable people[edit]
notable people[edit]
ajit pal mangat– indian film director. alexander dow – died at bhagalpur was an orientalist, writer, playwright and army officer in the east india company anand mohan sahay – general secretary in ina with netaji. ambassador in seven different countries. ashis nandy – indian political psychologist, a social theorist, and a contemporary cultural and political critic. ashok kumar – hindi indian movie actor. ashwini kumar choubey – bjp politician. ex health minister of bihar. b. j. choubey – professor in the tilka manjhi bhagalpur university balai chand mukhopadhyay – pen name banaphool, bengali writer. bhagwat jha azad – former chief minister of bihar chunchun prasad yadav - three consecutive times mp from bhagalpur dibyendu palit – bengali writer gurmeet choudhary – indian television actor, model and dancer. kadambini ganguly – daughter of braja kishore bose, headmaster of bhagalpur school, was india's one of the first women graduates and doctor was born in bhagalpur. lutfur rahman – urdu poet nandalal bose – artist neha sharma – hindi & south-indian movie actress. aisha sharma - hindi movie actress, sister of neha sharma nishikant dubey pritish nandy – poet, painter, journalist, politician, television personality, animal activist and film producer. rabindra kumar rana – politician, member of the 14th lok sabha. raj kamal jha – chief editor, the indian express; author and novelist ramjee singh – book edited - gandhi's centenary number, t.n.b . college, bhagalpur university, 1970 raveesh kumar - indian ambassador to finland, former spokesperson of ministry of external affairs in government of india. sanjay jha – former ceo of global foundries. saratchandra chattopadhyay – famous bengali novelist. the novel srikanth is based on bhagalpur. suchitra bhattacharya – acclaimed indian novelist was born in bhagalpur on 10 january 1950. syed shahnawaz hussain – bjp leader tapan sinha – film director tilka manjhi – first santhal freedom fighter. ajit sharma – member of bihar legislative assembly from bhagalpur constituency.
