bhagalpur
Local attractions[edit]
local attractions[edit]
kali puja[edit]
kali puja is one of the most important festivals in and around the region. several kali temples and puja mandaps are decked up on deepawali to worship kalika. the procession after the puja is so long that it takes 36 hours to complete one big phase of murti bisarjan. kali puja holds the cultural significance of the anga region. the procession after the puja is the intangible cultural asset to the city.
kali puja at rati kalibari near budhanath in bhagalpur
behula-bishari[edit]
in medieval bengali literature, mansamangal sings the tale of mansa and behula. mansa is popular known as bishari and padma in the angika-speaking belt. in the period from the thirteenth to the eighteenth century, many works based on this story were made. the religious purpose of these works was to render the importance of mansa mansa devi, but these works are more known for the pious love of behula (nicknamed bari) and her husband lakhander(lakhindar or lokhai, nicknamed bala). this is the story of bihula-bishhari from capital of angdesh champanogori (now in bhagalpur district called as champanagar). however, this is not just a methological story, the evidence of the metal house or "loha bashor ghor" (the word 'bashor' in angika refers to the room where bride and groom spends their first wedding night together) created by lord bishwakarma on the request of chandradhar saudagar for behula and her husband lakhender to protect from snake bite is still been seen and reported when there is heavy rain in the region.  nonetheless, mansa is the prime deity of the region and is known as the "adhishthatri bhagwati of anga". she is referred as the goddess who saves from snake bites and poison. mansa is the daughter of shiva and is born out of lotus flower, and thus named "padma or paddawati". the five mansa sisters are named chronologically as jaya bishari, dutila bhawani, padma kumari, aadi kusmin and mayna bishari". along with mansa sisters, netula dhobin or netai dhubuni is also worshipped in the puja altar. netula or netai is the known to take behula to the heaven and dhubri district in assam still sings the folk of netula, where she belonged, being the worshipper of goddess kamakhaya. mansa in mahabharat is named as "jaratkaru" and is worshipped to the saint of the same name and is thus known as "jaratkaru rishing patni". she is the mother of astik muni. the city of bhagalpur and it's adjoining areas celebrates the largest mansa puja in the country. "bishari mela" or the local fair is arranged from "16th to 19th august" every year on the singh nakshatra of shravan sankranti. in the honour of behula, locals offer manjusha art to the goddess, which is the local art of the region, which has got its gi tag. the manjusha art is full fledgedly based on the tales of behula and mansa. apart from this, locals sing "behula-bishari folksong" and perform "jatra or natak" (drama) to praise the goddess and narrates the sacrifice of behula to honor her.
mansa puja at deepnagar chowk in bhagalpur
budhanath temple[edit]
spread over three acres budhanath temple is located on the banks of the uttarvahini ganga (flowing from south to north) river. being one of the oldest temples in the region, it witnesses influx of devotees throughout the year. it is about twenty minutes from the main town. reference of baba budhanath can be found in shiva purana as baba bal vridheshwarnath. also, this name has been stated in the first segment of the eighth segments of shiva purana. the lingam of this place of worship is self-incarnated nevertheless as to when it came into being is still unknown. idol of ma bhavani can be seen beside the shivalinga or lingam.
shri champapur digamber jain temple[edit]
the tallest statue of lord vasupujya, champapur
champapur is an ancient and historic teerth kshetra of jainism. champapur is the place where all the five kalyanaks i.e., garbha, janam, tapa, kevalgyan and moksha kalyanak of bhagwan vasupujya, the 12th jain teerthankar, have taken place. the champapur was the capital of ‘anga janpada'. the anga janpada was one of the 52 janapada established by adi teerthankar bhagwan rishabh deo. champapur also existed as mahajanapada among the six mahajanapadas during the time of bhagwan mahavira swami.
the three chaturmas of bhagwan mahavira swami during his dikshakal, religious propagation centre of anga-banga-magadh-vaishali, test of modesty of sati subhadra and anantmati, aahardan to bhagwan mahaveer swami by sati chandan bala have taken place in champapur. champapur is also related to great stories of 'origin of harivansha, shripal-mainasundari, shri dharma ghosh muni, king karna of mahabharata, king mudrak and great architect vishvakarman’.
the main temple of champapur siddha kshetra is quite ancient (about 2500 years). this temple being symbolic of 'panch kalyanaka' is adorned with 5 altars, magnificent spire and 2 columns of fame. it is said that there were 4 'columns of fame (keerti stambha)’ which existed in four corners of the campus of the temple. later on the 2 out of 4 were destroyed in the earthquake of year 1934 & repair (jirnoddhar) of other 2 columns was done in 1938. the 'columns of fame' are about 2200 years ancient.
vikramshila mahavihara[edit]
maharshi mehi ashram[edit]
maharshi mehi ashram, kuppaghat, bhagalpur
maharshi mehi ashram is situated along the river side. kuppaghat, bhagalpur has grown into a sacred spiritual spot for thousands as saint maharishi spent many years in intense meditation on the inner light and sound at bhagalpur.
vikramshila gangetic dolphin sanctuary[edit]
bateshwarnath mahadev[edit]
ajgaibinath mahadev[edit]
jayprakash udyaan[edit]
mahashay deori[edit]
tetri durga mandir[edit]
baharampur durga mandir[edit]
jama masjid, champanagar[edit]
saint benedict's church[edit]
the church with the gothic architecture is located at the heart of the city. it has used the fine architecture and has come up as one of the most popular churches in the region. the interior and exterior design of the church is eternal bliss. during christmas and easter, the church and the whole court area is decked up like a queen.
saint benedict's church at court area in bhagalpur
khanqah-e-shahbazia[edit]
founded in 1577 ad, the khanqah-e-shahbazia is one of the most revered shrines of bhagalpur. it houses the grave of maulana shahbaz, a saint whose 13th-generation descendants still run the place. maulana shahbaz rahmatullah is considered one of the 40 sufi saints sent to spread the message of allah. the sajjadah nasheen (direct descendant of the saint) is supposed to spend his life within the confines of the khanqah and take care of its management, lead prayers and offer spiritual services. it is said that they are exempted from appearing in a court of law.
the mosque was built by aurangzeb and was frequently visited by him. every thursday, visitors assemble at the place to be blessed. most of the visitors are said to be from the eastern parts of india and bangladesh. there is a belief that the water in a pond here has medicinal qualities that can cure illness and snake bites. archeological survey of india has discovered some ancient manuscripts from the basement of khanqah e shahbazia.
the khanqah is also famous for its library, which has a vast collection of arabic and persian theological texts, including a copy of the qur’an transcribed by murshid quli khan, the nawab of murshidabad, bengal.
