bhatpara
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
industry[edit]
earlier, a significant portion of the population was engaged in some form of job in the local jute mills. economic instability related to the jute industry in west bengal forced many of these mills to be shut down. a large number of people of bhatpara commute to kolkata for work and a few are engaged in small personal businesses within the locality. a significant number of people have also moved out of bhatpara. (see the demographics section for the rather dramatic tell-tale data).
the titagarh paper mills were set up at titagarh and kakinara in 1882. as of 2017, titaghur paper mills co. ltd. is in the process of striking off. nafar chandra jute mills ltd. was established in 1935 and was recorded as active in 2017. however, it has been going through bad patches. nafar chandra jute mill was shut down in 2006, rendering around 6,000 workers jobless. again in 2015, both nafar chandra and kankinara jute mills shut down rendering a total of around 9,000 workers jobless. kanknarrah company limited was established in 1882 and its jute mill at kankinarah started producing in 1883. jardine henderson were the managing agents. the company was acquired by b.c.jain group in 1988. kankinara jute mill suspended work in 2006 and reopened in 2007. again in 2015, both nafar chandra and kankinara jute mills shut down rendering a total of around 9,000 workers jobless. alexandra jute mill, under national jute manufactures corporation limited at jagatdal is a closed mill. it was closed in 2002. meghna jute mill is closed.
there are a number of jute mills in the bhatpara area (jagatdal, kankinara and shyamnagar) listed by the jute commissioner: alliance mills, anglo-india jute and textile industries, auckland jute mill, jagatdal jute & industries, reliance jute mills, shree gourishankar jute mill and waverly jute mill. these mills are not declared as closed but they do not seem to be in operation. information about these mills is not readily available.
exide industries ltd, shyamnagar situated in authpur is one of the factories which are in good condition and important setup of storage battery manufacturer exide
kmda[edit]
bhatpara municipality is included in the kolkata metropolitan area for which the kmda is the statutory planning and development authority.
