bhatpara
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]
[interactive fullscreen map] cities and towns in the northern portion of barrackpore subdivision in north 24 parganas districtm: municipal city/ town, ct: census town, n: neighbourhood, og: outgrowthowing to space constraints in the small map, the actual locations in a larger map may vary slightly
location[edit]
bhatpara is located at 22°52′n 88°25′e﻿ / ﻿22.87°n 88.41°e﻿ / 22.87; 88.41. it has an average elevation of 12 metres (39 feet). the main town is sandwiched between the hoogly river in the west and railway track linking sealdah and krishnanagar in the east.
bhatpara is bounded by naihati and dogachhia on the north, panpur, rambati, mukundapur, abhirampur, keutia, bidydharpur, rahuta, basudevpur and gurdaha on the east, kaugachhi, garshyamnagar and garulia on the south and the hooghly on the west. although not specifically spelled out, it is evident that localities such as jagatdal, kankinara, shyamnagar, authpur, milangar and sahebbagan are neighbourhoods in bhatpara.
96% of the population of barrackpore subdivision (partly presented in the map alongside) live in urban areas. in 2011, it had a density of population of 10,967 per km the subdivision has 16 municipalities and 24 census towns.
for most of the cities/ towns information regarding density of population is available in the infobox. population data is not available for neighbourhoods. it is available for the entire municipal area and thereafter ward-wise.
all places marked on the map are linked in the full-screen map.
police station[edit]
jagaddal police station under barrackpore police commissionerate has jurisdiction over bhatpara municipal area.
post offices[edit]
bhatpara has a delivery sub post office, with pin 743123 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in kolkata region. the only other post office with the same pin is muktarpur.
esd m, a delivery sub post office in the jagatdal area has pin 743124 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in kolkata region. there is no other post office with the same pin.
jagatdal has a delivery sub post office, with pin 743125 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in kolkata region. other post offices with the same pin are golghar and gupter bagan.
kankinara has a delivery sub post office, with pin 743126 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in kolkata region. other post office with the same pin are keotia, kushdanga, madral, narayanpur and padmalavapur.
while shyamnagar has a delivery sub post office mulajore has a non-delivery sub post office, both with pin 743127 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in kolkata region. other post offices with the same pin are kowgachhi, paltapara, feeder road, gurdah, mondalpara and purbabidhyadharpur.
athpur has a delivery sub post office, with pin 743128 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in kolkata region. there is no other post office with the same pin.
fingapara has a delivery sub post office, with pin 743129 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in kolkata region. there is no other post office with the same pin.
weather[edit]
bhatpara has hot and humid summer and dry winter, typical of west bengal. the rainy season is typically from mid-july to mid- or late october. average temperature during summer can go as high as 38 degree celsius and in winter the mercury plunges to below 10 degree celsius. humidity, in the time of summer, is often above 90% and is the primary reason of discomfort.
