bhavnagar
Economy and industry[edit]
economy and industry[edit]
alang ship breaking yard

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (may 2012) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
industrial development in bhavnagar district could be attributed to the presence of a large number of diamond cutting and polishing units, salt and marine chemicals, plastics, shipbuilding, and ship-breaking industries. bhavnagar is an important center for the diamond cutting and polishing industry in gujarat as well as india. thousands of skilled diamond-polishing workers are employed in diamond-cutting and polishing firms, whose subsidiary offices are involved in cities like surat, mumbai, and antwerp. bhavnagar stands second in the diamond cutting and polishing industry after surat in india, with 6,000 units operating from the district and employing more than 300,000 people. bhavnagar's commercial importance is enhanced by its proximity to the gulf of cambay and the arabian sea.
bhavnagar is the largest producer of salt, with 34,500 tons of salt being produced annually in the district. the alang ship breaking yard is the biggest in the world, recycling about 50% of the salvaged ships of the world. this has also helped develop supporting industries, such as oxygen bottling plants, re-rolling mills, and induction furnaces.
industrial estates[edit]
bhavnagar district has various industrial estates where many msme industries are growing very rapidly with a great reputation around the world. many aides from the state and central government helped increase the number of industries in these areas. some of the industrial estates that are in bhavnagar districts jurisdiction are given below.
industrial estates in bhavnagar district   sr. no.  name of estate  location  estate area (in hectares)    1  chitra gidc  chitra  174.71   2  vartej gidc  vartej  73.58   3  sihor-2  sihor-2  18.17   4  mahuva  mahuva  18.21   5  palitana  palitana  14.48   6  sihor-1  sihor-1  12.45   7  vibrant industrial park  vitthalwadi  9.19   8  botad  botad  6.00   9  dhasa (gadhada)  dhasa (gadhada)  0.93   10  vallabhipur  vallabhipur  0.75
commerce[edit]
exports of cotton, ship machinery and dehydrated onions diamond cutting, polishing, and marketing manufacture of diamond jewellery manufacture of plastic rope, yarn, twine re-rolling mills for steel recovered from the ship-breaking yard at alang manufacture of investment castings with lost wax process (ferrous and non-ferrous) other large-scale manufacturing industries, such as fertiliser, soda-ash, steel casting, etc.
agriculture[edit]
main crops:
groundnut, onion, cotton, and bajra. guavas and pomegranate.and mango sagwadi farm of gyr cattle breed
