bhavnagar
City planning and architecture[edit]
city planning and architecture[edit]
ghogha circle
multiple town planning schemes were designed and implemented under the guidance of the progressive rulers of bhavnagar. during the reign of sir takhtsinhji, the british state engineer proctor sims supervised the construction of barton library, sir takhtsinhji hospital.
nilambagh palace, bhavnagar
a few architectural examples include:
takhteshwar temple (1893) is located on a hill, on a high plinth, offering a commanding view of bhavnagar. the high shikhara rising above the pillared rectangular mandapa makes it an important landmark. gangajalia (1893) is a temple dedicated to ganga-devi, with a chhatri, pavilion, and bridge all of white marble. it is located in the middle of a former tank. it was designed by sir john griffith, principal of sir j j school of arts, bombay. nilambag palace (1894), now a heritage hotel, is set amidst a huge estate of 10 acres (4.0 ha). it was designed by a british architect, william emerson as a royal residence; he also designed the sir takhtsinhji hospital and later victoria memorial in calcutta. it combines elements of indian architecture with a modern outlook. barton library (1895) is a two-storeyed building, appropriately designed for a road junction. it has two wings and a central tower, constructed in ashlar stone masonry, with gothic arch windows and a sloping roof with mangalore tiles. it is one of the oldest libraries of gujarat and also houses a museum. town hall (1932) was formerly a darbar hall, where the coronation of sir krishnakumarsinhji took place. it is an imposing structure in the colonial style, set in a well laid out garden. modern & contemporary architectural services is provided by various leading architectural firm like saga whose work is diverse yet of unified character, not only functional, aesthetic and techno-savvy.
modern bhavnagar comprises takhteshvar plots, krishnanagar, sardarnagar and surrounding area. during 1935–1937, krishnanagar area was planned and developed by late shri virendrabhai c. mehta, the official town planner for the state of bhavnagar. in 1961, he extended his krishnanagar plan towards sardarnagar. in 1975, he created a master plan for bhavnagar.
a salient feature of town planning is to have gardens at the junction of roads. gardens are located at ghogha circle, mahila college circle, rupani circle, meghani circle, shivaji circle, sardarnagar circle, jewels circle and crescent circle.
the city of bhavnagar was one of the earliest towns to have underground drainage in gujarat, and was among the first cities in gujarat to have a water filtration plant. when set up by krishna kumarsinhji bhavsinhji, the filtration plant was the largest in asia.
