bhavnagar
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]

this section has multiple issues. please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (learn how and when to remove these template messages)  this section may contain indiscriminate, excessive, or irrelevant examples. please improve the article by adding more descriptive text and removing less pertinent examples. see wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for further suggestions. (january 2017) this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (january 2017) (learn how and when to remove this template message)   (learn how and when to remove this template message)

see also: bhavnagar § city planning and architecture
bhavnagar has several places and sites of interest to tourists :
takhteshwar temple
nilambag palace is the residence of the current maharajah of bhavnagar, hh maharaol vijayrajsinhji virbhadrasinhji gohil, and his family.  it is now also a heritage palace hotel and a restaurant too. seashore at ghogha features a sea-side palace, about 22 kilometres (14 mi) from bhavangar, which was once a retreat of the bhavnagar royal family, and is now a hotel-guesthouse for travellers. barton library is a two-storeyed building, with two wings and a central tower, constructed in ashlar stone masonry with gothic arch windows and a sloping roof with mangalore tiles. opened in 1882, it is one of the oldest libraries in gujarat and also houses a museum. gandhi smriti is a memorial library for mahatma gandhi. it also has a fine collection of art objects representing the culture of the saurashtra region. central salt and marine chemicals research institute (csmcri) is the only constituent laboratory of the council of scientific and industrial research (csir) in gujarat. a significant research effort is being carried out here to develop biodiesel from jatropha. nishkalank mahadev - 20 km from he city of bhavnagar a village koliyak is known for seashore. there is a temple of mahadeva. it is said that pandvas came here to remove their sins of killing own brother. they came here and their flag converted its colour to white. that's why it is called nishkalank mahadev. a big gathering to take blessing of mahadeva at every month of "bhadrapad" amavasya. regional science museum bhavnagar - is the new science museum of bhavnagar
