bhopal
Culture
culture
bharat bhavan bhopal
diwali and eid are major festivals in bhopal. gifts and sweets are exchanged and donation are made to the poor. diwali is celebrated by worshiping the wealth goddess lakshmi. eid is special to the city as all the hindus take time out to visit their muslim friends and greet them and get treated with delicacies, the speciality of the day being sweet sewaiya. bhopali culture is such that both hindus and muslims visit each other on their respective festivals to greet and exchange sweets. during ganesh puja and durga puja (navratras), idols of ganesh and durga are established in jhankis throughout the city. people throng to offer prayers to their deities. at the end of navratras, on the day of vijayadashami (or dussehra), huge effigies of ravan are burnt in different parts of the city. apart from jhankis, several bengali associations like tt nagar bengali association, bhel kalibari, arera colony bangiya parishad, sundervan bairagarh, purbachal club, habibganj kalibari, kolar kalibari celebrates the annual durga puja in a huge way where large idols of mother goddess and pandals are installed and bhog is served. tt nagar bengali association had its 65th year durgotsav in the year 2021. also, these associations conduct several cultural programmes and other pujas like kalipuja, saraswati puja etc. one of the famous kali puja in new bhopal region is trilanga kali puja committee which conducts kalipuja from the last 25 years.  other places of worship and cultural activities for the bengali diaspora includes ramakrishna mission ashrama and bharat sevashram sangha. bhopal ijtema is an annual muslim world preachers congregation, is held at ghasipura 11 km from bhopal. the annual congregation near bhopal attracts between 500,000 and 1,000,000 muslims globally.
architecture
the nawabs of bhopal built several structures including the taj-ul-masajid and taj mahal palace in indo-islamic and european styles.
bharat bhavan is the main cultural centre of the city, and hosts many theatre and film festivals every year. it has an art gallery, an open-air amphitheatre facing the upper lake, two other theatres and a tribal museum. the bharat bhavan as well as the mp legislative assembly were designed by charles correa.
