bhopal
Transport
transport
bhopal share cycles
by air
raja bhoj international airport
the raja bhoj international airport is located near the suburb of sant hirdaram nagar (formerly known as bairagarh) and is the primary airport serving the state of madhya pradesh, india.
there are three routes or ways to reach the airport: (1) via bairagad, (2) via panchvati, (3) via gandhi nagar road (n.h 12). from within the city, vip road, a four lane road takes one to the airport, which lies 15 km to the north of the city. international flights began operations in 2010. domestic direct flight services are operated by air india, spice jet and indigo. as of january 2020, bhopal has non-stop flights to new delhi, mumbai, surat, jaipur, ahmedabad, udaipur, bangalore, hyderabad, pune and raipur. there are no international flight from bhopal.
rail
bhopal habibganj station
bhopal vip road
bhopal lies in the west central railway zone. considering both north–south and east–west train routes, it is one of the most rail connected cities in india which halts more than 200 daily trains, with a total of more than 380 trains within a week. the main stations of bhopal are the bhopal junction station and habibganj station  along with sant hirdaram nagar railway station. the main stations are equipped with wifi, have enough: waiting halls, refreshment centers, passenger ticket counters and ticket vending machines, vehicle parking, communication facilities, sanitary facilities and dedicated government railway police force to ensure security. altogether the city has six railway stations within its city limits.
the divisional railway manager's (drm) office of bhopal division is situated close to the railway station, at habibganj, the southern location in bhopal city. the division falls under west central railways.
roads
national highway 46 forms a ring-road around bhopal which connects it to jabalpur in the east (via nh 45). nh 146, a branch of nh 46, connects the city to sagar in the east. state highway 18 connects the city with indore (with sehore and dewas on the way). state highway 23 connects the city to guna and berasia in the north.
kushabhau thakre isbt bhopal
an interstate bus terminus inaugurated in 2011, the kushabhau thakre inter state bus terminal is located near the habibganj railway station,
urban transport
bhopal brts
the bus rapid transit system, which opened in 2013, is run by bhopal city link limited (bcll). the company has identified 4 trunk and 8 standard routes in the city on which 225 buses would be operated daily (365 a day in a year), from 5 a.m. to 11 p.m. 82 bus stops are built along the 24 km long corridor.
metro rail
the bhoj metro project is under construction for the city.
