bhopal
Places of interest
places of interest
nature
bhimbetka pre-historic rock cave painting near bhopal include 500 sandstone caves and shelters. these are dated to range from 12,000 years ago to chalcolithic era of human history. they are a unesco world heritage site.
bhimbetka caves are about 35 kilometres from bhopal city. they have evidence of dwellings of pre-historic man during the paleolithic era. rock paintings in the caves are specimens of pre-historic settlements in india. there are about 600 caves, but only 12 are open for visitors. the caves are located in the midst of sal and teak forests and includes a short trail around the caves. they were discovered by wakankar in 1957. unesco declared bhimbetka caves as a world heritage site in 2003.
van vihar national park is a national park in central india. it is located in bhopal, the capital city of madhya pradesh. declared a national park in 1979, it covers an area of about 4.45 km2. although it has the status of a national park, van vihar is developed and managed as a modern zoological park, following the guidelines of the central zoo authority. the animals are kept in their near natural habitat. most of the animals are either orphaned brought from various parts of the state or those, which are exchanged from other zoos. no animal is deliberately captured from the forest.[1] van vihar is unique because it allows easy access to the visitors through a road passing through the park, security of animals assured from poachers by building trenches and walls, chain-link fence and by providing natural habitat to the animals.
apart from lakes, bhopal also has many water reservoirs(dams) in and around the city. the dams are bhadbhada dam, kerwa dam, kaliyasot dam, halali dam and kolar dam. people of bhopal mostly visit these places during weekends. the weather is pleasant during and post monsoon. these places are surrounded by greenery throughout the year.
activity centres
the museum of man in bhopal exhibits tribal and folk houses from all corners of india.
shopping
the new market is a commercial area in bhopal. it is characterised by offices, new businesses and trade establishments. notable malls include db city mall in mp nagar, and aashima anupama mall. apart from new market, people can go for shopping at chowk bazar and sarafa in old city area of bhopal.
tourist attractions
this is a list of tourist attractions in or near bhopal:
upper lake (bhopal) van vihar national park bhimbetka rock shelters raisen sanchi shaurya smarak taj-ul-masjid bhojeshwar temple lower lake (bhopal) taj mahal (palace) bharat bhavan regional museum of natural history, bhopal indira gandhi rashtriya manav sangrahalaya kamlapati palace
a view of the bhojtal       taj mahal main entrance back side       lower lake       taj-ul-masajid gate

