bhopal
Economy
economy
bhel bhopal plant during monsoons.
the economy of bhopal is heavily industrial based with pharmaceutical, automobile, textile, and production of electrical goods mostly being prevalent. nominal gdp of bhopal district was rs. 30,467 crores for the year 2016–17 with a per-capita gdp of inr 1,04,829 as per the directorate of economics and statistics (madhya pradesh). the major industries in the old city are electrical goods, medicinal, cotton, chemicals and jewellery. other industries include cotton and flour milling, cloth weaving and painting, as well as making matches, sealing wax, and sporting equipment. the residents of bhopal also engage in large retail businesses. handicrafts, like zardozi and batua (a small string purse, usually used with indian traditional dresses) are some of the products of the old city.
bhopal is also home to the db corp, informally called the bhaskar group (named after its major publication dainik bhaskar), a ₹17 billion business conglomerate with a strong presence in media. its head office is located in maharana pratap nagar. while an it park, near bhopal airport, houses various software development companies and the city is expected to further enlarge its it presence in near future with giants like wipro intending to establish software development centre in the city. other software and it companies established in the city include sutherland global services, isoft infotech, soluzione it services, netlink software pvt ltd., caresoft inc india, osmo it solution pvt ltd., and many more.
manjul publishing house, located in the old city, is a major publishing house made famous by the translation of the harry potter series of novels into hindi.
industries
bharat heavy electricals limited, the largest engineering and manufacturing enterprise in india, has a unit in bhopal. it occupies a large area in the eastern part of the city and maintains a suburb named after it. a majority of the residents of the bhel suburb are employed by the unit. govindpura industrial area is a huge industrial zone situated in northern limits of the city. mandideep is an industrial suburb of bhopal. it is located to the south of the city on the nh 12. manufacturing units in mandideep include heg limited, procter & gamble, lupin limited, eicher tractors, insulators and electricals limited, tafe motors and tractors limited, b. s. engineering works, etc. rapidly transforming industrial zones near bhopal also include bagroda akvn, tamot plastic park and acharpura industrial area. with the state government providing conducive environment for setting up of manufacturing units, the industrial zones have seen exponential demand from the investors to purchase the land which are provided at heavily subsidized prices. bhopal also has in its vicinity badiyakhedi industrial area (sehore), pilukhedi industrial area (rajgarh), budhni industrial area (sehore), jamuniya khejda (raisen) and mohasa babai industrial area (narmadapuram). the industrial areas have attracted huge investments with companies like welspun corp. ltd, vardhaman industries, trident group, lapp india, and inox air products pvt. ltd. already operating manufacturing plants in various industrial belts.
upcoming projects
bhopal also has many other mega projects lined up in its vicinity. in march 2022, madhya pradesh government announced the development of bagroda industrial area phase-2 after observing the immense interest of investors to set up manufacturing units near bhopal. the government has also decided to develop berasia industrial area in bhopal district, a site close to jaipur-bhopal highway and delhi-gwalior-bhopal highway. in the sphere of it development, a mega skill park with a total investment of more than inr 1,500 crores is being built in the eastern portion of the city. the global skills park, bhopal is a highly touted project of the central and the state government which is being funded by the asian development bank (adb). the park is expected to be fully commissioned at the end of 2023. while the it park near bhopal airport is eying investments of software companies including tcs and wipro. it startups of the city are already functioning in this area.
