bhubaneswar
Sports[edit]
sports[edit]
kalinga stadium, bhubaneswar
bhubaneswar golf club
bhubaneswar's major sporting arena is the kalinga stadium, having facilities for athletics, football, hockey, basketball, tennis, table tennis and swimming. it is known for hosting the odisha hockey world cup in november–december 2018. kalinga lancers, the sixth franchise of hockey india league and odisha fc, a club of indian super league, are based in bhubaneswar with kalinga stadium as their home ground. east coast railway stadium, a prominent cricket stadium hosts ranji trophy and other matches.
odisha naval tata hockey high performance centre, a hockey academy for sub-junior and junior category, has also been set up at kalinga stadium after government of odisha, tata steel & tata trusts (hockey ace foundation) joined hands to initiate a three-pronged program under the hpc banner of government of odisha.
the construction of a gallery and stadium renovation is under way. an air-conditioned indoor stadium, with a capacity of 2000 spectators for badminton, volleyball, basketball and table tennis games is also being constructed. barabati stadium in cuttack, odisha's only venue for international cricket matches, is located around 25 kilometres (16 mi) away. bhubaneswar has a franchise of odisha premier league, bhubaneswar jaguars, which started in 2010. bhubaneswar golf club, a nine-hole golf course is situated in infocity.
the kalinga institute of industrial technology stadium commonly kiit stadium is a new multipurpose stadium located as a part of kalinga institute of industrial technology university campus or kiit university in bhubaneswar with a capacity of 40,000 currently.
the 2017 asian athletics championships was the 22nd edition of the asian athletics championships. it was held from 6–9 july 2017 at the kalinga stadium. bhubaneswar is the third indian city to host the asian athletics championships, with delhi being the first, in 1989, and pune, the second, in 2013.
bhubaneswar is emerging as the new sports capital of india, as the fih and the ioa president, narindar batra, recently stated in a ceremony, while unveiling the new logo for the indian hockey team jersey, which is sponsored by the government of odisha. the state, batra mentioned, provides equal importance and opportunity for all sports such as cricket, football, field hockey, tennis, badminton, chess and many more.
