bhubaneswar
Education[edit]
education[edit]

see also: list of institutions of higher education in odisha
academic block of xavier institute of management, bhubaneswar
institute of physics bhubaneswar library
niser, bhubaneshwar
indian institute of technology bhubaneswar
all india institute of medical sciences bhubaneswar
utkal university bhubaneswar
bhubaneswar is a centre for higher education in the eastern region and is considered the education hub of eastern india with several government and privately funded universities and colleges. iit bhubaneswar, niser bhubaneswar, aiims bhubaneswar and nift bhubaneswar are some of the elite institutions of country which are located in the city. utkal university bhubaneswar is the oldest university in odisha and the 17th oldest university in india.
primary and secondary education[edit]
odia and english are the primary languages of instruction. schools in bhubaneswar follow the "10+2+3" plan for regular graduates and "10+2+4" plan for technical studies. schools in bhubaneswar are either run by the state government or private organisations. students typically enroll in schools that are affiliated with any of the following mediums of education.
bse, odisha chse, odisha cbse council for the indian school certificate examinations scte&vt, odisha
notable union government schools in the city include
kendriya vidyalaya no. 1, bhubaneswar, sainik school,
notable state government schools in the city include
badagada government high school, bhubaneswar capital high school, bhubaneswar government high school, saheed nagar
notable private schools in the city include
dav public school, unit-8, bhubaneswar, d.a.v. public school, chandrasekharpur, loyola school, bhubaneswar, sai international school, bhubaneswar, st. joseph's high school, bhubaneswar,
higher education[edit]
several colleges are affiliated with universities or institution based in bhubaneswar or elsewhere in india. most offer a wide range of programs in stem and applied research and are rated highly by the ministry of human resource development, india.
engineering and applied sciences institutions[edit]
c. v. raman global university central institute of freshwater aquaculture eastern academy of science and technology indian institute of technology bhubaneswar institute of chemical technology, mumbai (off campus in collaboration with indianoil and iit kharagpur) institute of minerals and materials technology (immt, erstwhile rrl) institute of physics international institute of information technology, bhubaneswar (iiit-bbsr or iiit-bh) kalinga institute of industrial technology national institute of fashion technology (nift) national institute of science education and research (niser) orissa engineering college regional institute of education
medical institutions[edit]
all india institute of medical sciences bhubaneswar hi-tech medical college & hospital, bhubaneswar institute of medical sciences and sum hospital kalinga institute of medical sciences regional medical research center
universities[edit]
birla global university, bhubaneswar centurion university of technology and management, bhubaneswar odisha university of technology and research international institute of information technology, bhubaneswar (iiit-bbsr or iiit-bh) kalinga institute of industrial technology odisha state open university odisha university of agriculture and technology rama devi women's university regional college of management siksha 'o' anusandhan utkal university of culture utkal university xavier university
professional institute
the institute of cost accountants of india -bhubaneswar chapter, bhubaneswar. the institute of chartered accountants of india-bhuneshwar branch of eirc
think tanks / research institutes[edit]
nabakrushna choudhury centre for development studies (ncds)
tourism education is another field of study emerging. the eastern regional centre of indian institute of tourism and travel management (iittm), the second in the country after gwalior, was established in 1996. one iata authorised training centre (atc) is also located in the city premises. several regional management educational institutions also have travel and tourism related courses in their curriculum.
