bhubaneswar
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
east coast railway headquarters in bhubaneswar
tata consultancy services in bhubaneswar
bhubaneswar is an administrative, information technology, education and tourism city. bhubaneswar was ranked as the best place to do business in india by the world bank in 2014. bhubaneswar has emerged as one of the fast-growing, important trading and commercial hub in the state and eastern india. tourism is a major industry, attracting about 1.5 million tourists in 2011. bhubaneswar was designed to be a largely residential city with outlying industrial areas. the economy had few major players until the 1990s and was dominated by retail and small-scale manufacturing. with the economic liberalisation policy adopted by the government of india in the 1990s, bhubaneswar received investment in telecommunications, information technology (it) and higher education.
in 2011, according to a study by associated chambers of commerce and industry of india, bhubaneswar had the highest rate of employment growth among 17 tier-2 cities in india. it has been listed among the top ten emerging cities in india by cushman and wakefield, taking into consideration factors like demographics, physical, social and real estate infrastructure, current level and scope of economic activities and government support. in 2012, bhubaneswar was ranked third among indian cities, in starting and operating a business by the world bank. bhubaneswar has been traditionally home to handicrafts industry, including silver filigree work, appliqué work, stone and wood carvings and patta painting, which significantly contributes to the city's economy. the late 2000s saw a surge of investments in the real estate, infrastructure, retail and hospitality sectors; several shopping malls and organised retails opened outlets in bhubaneswar. in the informal sector, 22,000 vendors operate in regulated or unregulated vending zones.
as of 2001, around 2.15% of the city's workforce was employed in the primary sector (agriculture, forestry, mining, etc.); 2.18% worked in the secondary sector (industrial and manufacturing); and 95.67% worked in the tertiary sector (service industries).
the department of industries established four industrial areas in and around bhubaneswar, in the rasulgarh, mancheswar, chandaka, and bhagabanpur areas. industrial sector in bhubaneswar includes paper, steel, automobile, food, pharma and electronics industries. a large number of companies including odisha state cooperative milk producers' federation, bharat biotech, topaz solar, britannia industries, sms group and jockey international have there manufacturing plant.
in 2009, odisha was ranked ninth among indian states in terms of software export by nasscom, with most it/ites companies established in bhubaneswar. in 2011–12, odisha had a growth rate of 17% for software exports. according to a 2012 survey, among the tier-2 cities in india, bhubaneswar has been chosen as the best for conducting it/ites business. the government fostered growth by developing of it parks such as infocity-1, infovalley, stpi-bhubaneswar and jss stp. infocity was conceived as a five-star park, under the export promotion industrial parks (epip) scheme to create infrastructure facilities for setting up information technology related industries. infosys and tech mahindra have been present in bhubaneswar since 1996. other software companies, firms and multinational companies include tata consultancy services, wipro, ibm, genpact, firstsource, mindtree, mphasis, ericsson, semtech, reliance communications, pricewaterhousecoopers , bharti airtel, dlf (company), capgemini and deloitte. it also houses the headquarters of posco india, a subsidiary of south korean conglomerate posco and govt. of india owned national aluminium company(nalco). apart from the big multinationals, some 300 small and mid-size it companies and business startups have offices in bhubaneswar.
