bhubaneswar
Governance and Politics[edit]
governance and politics[edit]
civic administration[edit]
krushi bhavan building in bhubaneswar.
the bhubaneswar municipal corporation (bmc) oversees and manages civic infrastructure for the city's 67 wards. it started as a notified area committee in 1946 and was upgraded to a municipal corporation in 1994. orissa municipal corporation act, 2003 is the governing act. residents of each ward elect a corporator to the bmc for a five-year term. standing committees handle urban planning and maintain roads, government-aided schools, hospitals and municipal markets.
as bhubaneswar's apex body, the corporation discharges its functions through the mayor-in-council, which comprises a mayor, a deputy mayor and other elected members. the executive wing is headed by a commissioner. there are 13 administrative departments under bmc: pr & communication, disaster management, finance, health & sanitation, engineering, revenue & tax, electrical, environment, social welfare, it and social projects, establishment, land & assets, enforcement & recovery. the responsibilities of the municipal body include drainage and sewerage, sanitation, solid waste management and street lighting.
the tenure of the last elected body ended in january 2019 and new elections have not taken place yet, because the high court struck down the delimitation process that was carried out for exceeding 50% reservations of seats. ward committees have been formed in bhubaneswar and are very active. the committees are responsible for issues such as public health, sanitation, street lighting and conservancy in their respective wards. there is no fixed number of members in the committees.
the processes for the municipal budget 2020-21 was initiated in february 2020, but it is unclear if they have continued after the lockdown was accounced. the budget for 2020-21 was supposed to be aroound rs. 700, an increase of 51.8% from the 2019-20 budget. the increase was supposedly to fund the various socio-economic welfare schemes in the city. the key revenue sources for bmc are: holding taxes, tax from advertisements, rent from municipal properties such as markets, shopping complexes, and kalyan mandaps (marriage halls), fees and user charges, and grants from state and central governments.
lok sabha and vidhan sabha constituencies[edit]
citizens of bhubaneswar elect one representative to india's lower house, the lok sabha, and three representatives to the state legislative assembly, through the constituencies of bhubaneswar north, ekamra-bhubaneswar, and bhubaneswar central. the last lok sabha election was in 2019, when aparajita sarangi from bharatiya janata party won the seat. the last state assembly election took place in 2019 as well, when all three vidhan sabha seats in bhubaneswar were won by biju janata dal: susant kumar rout from north, ashok chandra panda from ekamra, and ananta narayan jena from central.
judicial and police institutions[edit]
as the seat of the government of odisha, bhubaneswar is home to the odisha legislative assembly and the state secretariat. bhubaneswar has lower courts: the court of small causes and the district civil court decide civil matters; the sessions court rules in criminal cases. the bhubaneswar–cuttack police commissionerate, established in 2008, is a city police force with primary responsibilities in law enforcement and investigation in the bhubaneswar-cuttack area. shri s.k. priyadarshi, ips is the police commissioner.
odisha state secretariat building
