bhubaneswar
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
muktesvara deula, covered with erotic ancient carvings, known for its quality of sculptures
bindusagara water tank on a winter morning
ravindra mandapa, an auditorium in bhubaneswar
bhubaneswar is supposed to have had over one thousand temples, earning the tag of the 'temple city of india'. temples are made in the kalinga architectural style with a pine spire that curves up to a point over the sanctum housing the presiding deity and a pyramid-covered hall where people sit and pray.
famous temples include lingaraja temple, muktesvara temple, rajarani temple, ananta vasudeva temple. the kukutesvara siva temple is a small, 1000-year-old shrine to shiva.
the twin hills of khandagiri and udayagiri, served as the site of an ancient jaina monastery which was carved into cave-like chambers in the face of the hill. these caves, with artistic carvings, date back to the 2nd century bce. dhauli hills has major edicts of ashoka engraved on a mass of rock and a white peace pagoda was built by the japan buddha sangha and the kalinga nippon buddha sangha in the 1970s. apart from the ancient temples, other important temples were built in recent times include ram mandir and iskcon.
bhubaneswar along with cuttack is the home of the odia cinema industry, dubbed "ollywood", where most of the state's film studios are situated.
odia culture survives in the form of classical odissi dance, handicrafts, sand artistry and sculpturing as well as theatre and music. boundary walls and gardens are increasingly being redone to depict the folk art of the state. odissi, the oldest of the eight surviving classical dance forms of india can be traced from archaeological evidence from the temples in bhubaneswar.
odissi dance[edit]
odissi dance is generally accompanied by odissi music. srjan, the odissi dance academy founded by guru kelucharan mohapatra, the legendary odissi dancer is found here. the rabindra mandapa in central bhubaneswar plays host to cultural engagements, theatre and private functions.
odissi dance
dress and attire[edit]
though odia women traditionally wear the sari, shalwar kameez and of late, western attire is gaining acceptance among younger women. western-style dress has greater acceptance among men, although the traditional dhoti and kurta are seen during festivals.
the odisha state museum offers archaeological artefacts, weapons, local arts and crafts as well as insights into odisha's natural and indigenous history. the tribal research institute museum hosts authentic tribal dwellings created by tribal craftsmen. nandankanan zoological park, located on the northern outskirt of the city, is india's first zoo to join world association of zoos and aquariums. the state botanical garden (odisha) and regional plant resource center, popularly known as ekamra kanan, a park and botanical garden, has a large collection of exotic and regional fauna. the ekamra haat is a hand-loom and handicrafts market. nicco park and ocean world are amusement parks. other museums include pathani samanta planetarium, regional museum of natural history, regional science center and state handicrafts museum.
festivals[edit]
on the day of ashokashtami in the month of march or april, the image of lingaraja (shiva) and other deities are taken in a procession from lingaraja temple to the mausima temple, where the deities remain for four days. hundreds of devotees participate in pulling the temple car that carries the deities, known as rukuna ratha. ratha-yatra, "temple car festival," is the most important festival in odisha and bhubaneswar. the festival commemorates jagannatha, who is said to have been the incarnation of india's revered deities, vishnu and krishna. durga puja, held in september–october, is an occasion for glamorous celebrations.
as a part of the ekamra festival, many cultural sub-festivals take place in january in bhubaneswar which include kalinga mahotsaba (for traditional martial arts), dhauli-kalinga mahotsaba (for classical dance forms), rajarani music festival (for classical music) and mukteswara dance festival (for odishi dance). residents engage in khattis, or leisurely chats, that often take the form of freestyle intellectual conversation.
other festivals celebrated include shivaratri, diwali, ganesha chaturthi, nuakhai and saraswati puja. eid and christmas are celebrated by the religious minorities in the city.
the adivasi mela, held in january, is a fair that displays the art, artefacts, tradition, culture, and music of the tribal inhabitants of odisha. the toshali national crafts mela, held in december, showcases handicrafts from all over india and from foreign countries. other important fairs in the city include the rajdhani book fair, dot fest and khandagiri utsav. two international literary festivals are held in the city, kalinga literary festival and mystic kalinga festival. in modern times bhubaneswar hosts a literary festival, the odisha literary fest.
cuisine[edit]
pahala rasagola, a famous sweet which originated in odisha
chhena gaja, another famous sweet of odisha
key elements of the city's cuisine include rice and a fish curry known as machha jhola, which can be accompanied by desserts such as rasagola, rasabali, chhena gaja, chhena jhilli and chhena poda. odisha's large repertoire of seafood dishes includes various preparations of lobsters and crabs brought in from chilika lake.
street foods such as gupchup (a deep-fried crêpe, stuffed with a mix of mashed potatoes and boiled yellow peas, and dipped in tamarind-infused water), cuttack-chaat, dahibara aloo dum (a deep-fried doughnut-shaped lentil dumpling marinated in yogurt-infused water and served alongside potato curry) and bara-ghuguni are sold all over the city. traditional oriya food such as dahi-pakhala (rice soaked in water with yogurt and seasonings) which is considered as a body coolant, accompanied by badi chura or saga are consumed during the months of april–june.
the abadha of lingaraja temple and ananta vasudeva temple served for devotees is considered a vegetarian culinary delight. other vegetarian dishes are dalma (made of lentils and vegetables boiled together and then fried with other spices) and santula (lightly spiced steamed vegetables).
