bhubaneswar
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
mo cycle
bicycle[edit]
a public bicycle sharing project named mo cycle has been started by the bhubaneswar smart city limited (bscl) and the capital region urban transport (crut). the scheme aims to reduce traffic congestion, promote non-motorized transport in the city and ensure better last mile connectivity. chief minister naveen patnaik in november 2011 inaugurated mo cycle. around 400 cycle stands have been set up across the city. around 2,000 bicycles have been ordered from three companies - hexi, yaana and yulu. hexi (from hero cycles) will provide 1,000 bicycles and yaana and yulu will provide 500 each. the availability of rentals bicycles are accessed by the dedicated mobile app - "mo app".
bus[edit]
mo bus
internal public transport is maintained by "mo bus (my bus)" service administrated by crut(capital region urban transport) along with connecting nearest cities like cuttack and puri.  the headquarters of the odisha state road transport corporation (osrtc) is in bhubaneswar. the main bhubaneswar inter-state bus terminus is at barmunda, 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) from the city centre, from where osrtc and private operators run buses connecting bhubaneswar to cities in odisha and with the neighbouring states of andhra pradesh, jharkhand, west bengal and chhattisgarh. bhubaneswar is connected to the rest of odisha and india by national highway-nh 16, which is a part of the kolkata-chennai prong of the golden quadrilateral, nh 203, state highway 13 (odisha) and state highway 27 (odisha). asian highway- ah 45 passes through the city.
show zoomed outshow zoomed midshow zoomed inshow all
road[edit]
one of the many fly-overs in the city.
bhubaneswar has roads in grid form in the central city. bhubaneswar has approximately 1,600 kilometres (990 mi) of roads, with average road density of 11.82 square kilometres (4.56 sq mi). baramunda inter state bus terminus (isbt) is the major bus terminus in the city from where buses ply to all the districts in odisha as well as to neighbouring state's cities like hyderabad, kolkata, visakhapatnam, raipur and ranchi. city bus service (mo bus) runs across bhubaneswar by capital region urban transport authority run by bhubaneswar development authority . a fleet of 300+ buses cover all major destinations including cuttack, puri and khordha. auto rickshaws are available for hire and on a share basis throughout the city. in parts of the city, cycle rickshaws offer short trips. to ease traffic jams, over-bridges at major road junctions and expansion of roads are under construction. in a study of six cities in india, bhubaneswar was ranked third concerning pedestrian infrastructure. the city scored 50 points out of a maximum of 100.
railway station[edit]
bhubaneswar railway station
bhubaneswar has the following stations:
station name  station code  railway zone  number of platforms   bhubaneswar  bbs  east coast railway  6   mancheswar  mcs  east coast railway  4   lingaraj temple road  lgtr  east coast railway  3   vani vihar  bnbh  east coast railway  2   patia  ptab  east coast railway  2   new bhubaneswar  bbsn  east coast railway  7   barang  brag  east coast railway  3
the east coast railway has its headquarters in bhubaneswar. bhubaneswar railway station is one of the main stations of the indian railway network. it is connected to major cities by daily express and passenger trains and daily service to all metro cities is available from here. however, the station is overloaded by existing traffic. currently, the station has six platforms. there are plans to add two more platforms.
a satellite station new bhubaneswar railway station is opened near barang in july 2018 to decongest the existing installation.
airport[edit]
biju patnaik international airport
biju patnaik international airport (iata: bbi, icao: vebs) also known as bhubaneswar airport, 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) south of the city centre, is the major and sole international airport in odisha. there are daily domestic flights from bhubaneswar to delhi, hyderabad, mumbai, kolkata, vishakhapatnam, chennai and bangalore.the major carriers from bhubaneswar are indigo, vistara, airasia berhad, airasia india and air india. in march 2013, a new domestic terminal with a capacity of handling 30 million passengers per year was inaugurated to handle increased air traffic. on 10 july 2015, the first international flight took off from terminal 2 of biju patnaik international airport.
