bhubaneswar
History[edit]
history[edit]
remains of the ancient city of sisupalagada, on the outskirts of bhubaneswar, dated to 7th century bce
hathigumpha inscriptions at the udayagiri and khandagiri caves near bhubaneswar
bhubaneswar stands near the ruins of sisupalgarh, the ancient capital of the erstwhile province of kalinga. dhauli, near bhubaneswar was the site of the kalinga war (c. 262-261 bce), in which the mauryan emperor ashoka invaded and annexed kalinga. one of the most complete edicts of the mauryan emperor, ashoka, dating from between 272 and 236 bce, remains carved in rock, 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) to the southwest of the modern city. after the decline of the mauryan empire, the area came under the rule of mahameghavahana dynasty, whose most well-known ruler is kharavela. his hathigumpha inscription is located at the udayagiri and khandagiri caves near bhubaneswar. the area was subsequently ruled by several dynasties, including satavahanas, guptas, matharas, and shailodbhavas.
in the 7th century, somavamshi or keshari dynasty established their kingdom in the area, and constructed a number of temples. after the kesharis, the eastern gangas ruled kalinga area until the 14th century ce. their capital kalinganagara was located in present-day bhubaneswar city. after them, mukunda deva of the bhoi dynasty – the last hindu ruler of the area until the marathas – developed several religious buildings in the area. most of the older temples in bhubaneswar were built between 8th and 12th centuries, under shaiva influence. the ananta vasudeva temple is the only old temple of vishnu in the city. in 1568, the karrani dynasty of afghan origin gained control of the area. during their reign, most of the temples and other structures were destroyed or disfigured.
in the 16th century, the area came under pachamani mughal control. the marathas, who succeeded the mughals in the mid-18th century, encouraged pilgrimage in the region. in 1803, the area came under british colonial rule, and was part of the bengal presidency (until 1912), bihar and orissa province (1912-1936) and orissa province (1936-1947). the capital of the british-ruled orissa province was cuttack, which was vulnerabile to floods and suffered from space constraints. because of this, on 30 september 1946, a proposal to move the capital to a new capital was introduced in the legislative assembly of the odisha province. after independence of india, the foundation of the new capital was laid by prime minister jawaharlal nehru on 13 april 1948.
the name of the new capital came from "tribhubaneswara" or "bhubaneswara" (literally "lord of the earth"), a name of shiva, the deity of the lingaraja temple. the legislative assembly of odisha was shifted from cuttack to bhubaneswar in 1949. bhubaneswar was built as a modern city, designed by german architect otto königsberger with wide roads, gardens and parks. though part of the city followed the plan, it grew rapidly over the next few decades, outstripping the planning process. according to the first census of independent india, taken in 1951, the city's population was just 16,512. from 1952 to 1979, it was administered by a notified area council or a nagar panchayat; a municipality was established only on 12 march 1979. by the 1991 census, the population of bhubaneswar had increased to 411,542. accordingly, on 14 august 1994, the bhubaneswar municipal corporation was established.
