bidar
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of bidar
the recorded history of the city goes back to the third century b.c. when it was a part of the mauryan empire. after the mauryas, satavahanas, kadambasand chalukyas of badami and later the rashtrakutas reigned over bidar territory. the chalukyas of kalyana and kalachuris of kalyanis also regained the area. for a short period after kalyani chalukyas the area of bidar was under the seunas of devagiri and kakatiyas of warangal.
the delhi sultanate invaded the area first by allauddin khilji, and later, muhammed-bin-tughluq took control of entire deccan including bidar. in the middle of the 14th century, the sultan of delhi's officers that were stationed in deccan rebelled and this resulted in the establishment of bahmanid dynasty in 1347 a.d. at gulbarga/hasanabad (present kalaburagi). there was frequent warfare between the bahmanids and the vijaynagar kingdom.
the history of the present fort at bidar is attributed to the sultan ahmed shah wali bahmani, the  sultan of the bahmani dynasty till 1427, when he shifted his capital from gulbarga to bidar since it had better climatic conditions and was also a fertile and fruit-bearing land.  the earliest recorded history of its existence as a small and strong fort is also traced to prince ulugh khan in 1322, whereafter it came under the reign of the tughlaq dynasty.
with the establishment of the bahmanid dynasty (1347), bidar was occupied by sultan ala-ud-din bahman shah bahmani. during the rule of ahmad shah i (1422–1486), bidar was made the capital city of bahmani kingdom. the old fort was rebuilt and madrasas, mosques, palaces, and gardens were raised. mahmud gawan, who became the prime minister in 1466, was a notable figure in the history of bidar. bidar remained under the barid shahi dynasty until conquest by the bijapur sultanate in 1619. aurangzeb came to bidar after his father, padshah (emperor) shah jahan, appointed him the prince of deccan. he wrested the bidar fort from the adil shahis after a 21-day war in 1656. with this, bidar became a part of the mughal dynasty for the second time. bidar was made a subah (imperial top-level province) in 1656, which telangana subah was merged into the next year.
in 1724, bidar became a part of the asaf jahi kingdom of the nizams. third son of asaf jah l ( nizam l ) mir sa'id muhammad khan, salabat jang ruled from bidar fort from 1751 to 1762, till his brother mir nizam ali khan asaf jah iii imprisoned him in this fort, and was killed in bidar fort on 16 september 1763. mohammedabad old name of bidar is also on his name. it was connected to hyderabad by rail in the early 20th century. after india's independence, in 1956 all kannada speaking areas were merged to form the mysore state and bidar became part of the new mysore (now karnataka) state.
ancient karez system in the city have been recently discovered. the karez (qanat) is an underground network of aqueducts for water supply. the bidar karez, built in the 15th century, is more than 3 km (1.9 mi) long with 21 air vents. underground canals, built to connect underground water streams, were meant to provide drinking water to civilian settlements and the garrison inside the bidar fort. this was necessary in a city where the soil was rocky and drilling wells was difficult.
