bidar
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]

bidarhyderabad 140 km (87 mi)bangalore  700 km (430 mi)mumbai 600 km (370 mi)chennai 788 km (490 mi)class=notpageimage| distance from major metropolitan cities near to bidar.
bidar is symbolically described as city of whispering monuments. the mountaintop city that served as the capital of medieval deccan, has 98 monuments of which four national monuments are protected by the archaeological survey of india and 14 by the state archaeology department, karnataka.
bidar earned a place on the world monument watchlist 2014. of the 741 proposals received from 166 countries, 67 sites from 41 countries were finally selected which were announced by wmf president bonnie burnham in new york on 8 october 2013. along with "the historic city of bidar", two other sites in india to figure in the list were the house of sheikh salim chisti in fatehpur sikri and juna mahal in rajasthan.
the wmf in its current watch site for "the historic city of bidar" says ″challenges to the site include a lack of integrated conservation and maintenance, environmental pollution, and the construction of new developments and roadways that encroach on the historic fabric. current land use regulations also threaten the economic livelihood of many of the city's residents, and it is hoped that revised, context-specific planning policies would both protect bidar's historic assets while also supporting the future of its local population. it is hoped that watch-listing will spur documentation and analysis of the city's conditions, followed by policy development and applied conservation interventions that will reveal and maintain bidar's rich heritage, as well as support a robust and sustainable tourist industry.″
mahmud gawan madrasa[edit]

main article: mahmud gawan madrasa
this grandiose madrasa was built by the prime-minister of the bahmani empire, mahmud gawan in the late 15th century. its only the most imposing building of the bahmani period, but in its plan and in the general style of its architecture it is a unique monument of its kind in india. the madrasa, a multi-disciplinary university he set up, which had a library of around 3,000 valuable manuscripts, was severely damaged when gunpowder stored inside the rooms went off during a 27-day siege of the city by mughal king aurangazeb in 1656. the mahmud gawan madrasa is protected by the archaeological survey of india.
bidar fort[edit]
bidar fort is considered one of the most formidable forts of the country. bidar city was distinctly planned and built. the main citadel complex housed the royal places. mahals and mosque. adjoining to this on the southern side, the city was built for the people. both the citadel complex and city had separate forts for protection the plan of the bidar city fortification is pentagonal. there are five gateways for entry into the city fort. it is main citadel complex fort which is stronger. it is built on the brink of the plateau. engineers and architecture of various countries were employed on its design and construction. a museum is preset there having old armor, old sculptures. including many of the ancient stones,
museum inside bidar fort
rangeen mahal, situated in the fort, near gumbad darwaza, is unique because of its decoration with coloured tiles and other art work. wood carving done there is not only precious but also unique. the walls of mahal are adorned with mother-of-pearl of the finest quality in laid in jet-black stone. floral patterns and calligraphic text are also depicted here. stone carving, stucco art are other attractions of this monument. it was rebuilt during barid shahi period. the design of this monument represents a blend of both hindu and muslim architecture. there are rooms in the basement of the rangin mahal. tarkash mahal is said to have been built for turkish wife of the sultan. from the remains of the decorative work found in the ornamentation of the walls, it can be said that the mahal was built or extended by the barid shahi sultans who had kept large harem with ladies from different nationalities.the rooms were decorated with stucco work. gagan mahal was originally built by the bahamani kings and some alterations and additions were made by the barid shahi rulers. it has two courts. the outer court was used by the male staff and guards. the inner court also, there are rooms on either side of the covered passage for the accommodation of the guards. the main building of the palace was for the use of the sultan and his harem. takht mahal, the royal palace, was built by ahemd shah. it was the royal residence. the place was fully decorated with coloured titles and stone carvings part of which can be seen even today. it had two side royal pavilions with lofty arches and a spacious hall at the back of which was the sultan's room. the building had stately dimensions and exquisite surface decoration. the coronations of several bahamanis and barid shahi sultans were held there. from the royal pavilion which is situated behind throne palace one can view the valley and low land below. solah khamba mosque (solah sutoon ki masjid) was built by qubil sultani between 1423 and 1424. the mosque derives its name from the 16 pillars that are lined in the front of the structure. popularly known as the zanana masjid, this mosque is about 90 metres long and 24 metres wide. behind the southern wall of this mosque, there is a large well. characterised by columns, arches and domes, this mosque is one of the largest in india.
other monuments[edit]
chaubara is a tall tower, facing in four directions. this is an old cylindrical tower of 22 meters, height is situated in the centre of bidar city. it was used as a watchtower, commanding a fine view of the entire plateau from the top. a winding staircase of eight steps leads to the top of the tower, a clock is being placed on top of the tower, can be viewed from all the four directions . jama masjid, a large mosque with no minarets, located near chaubara. bahmani tombs called as "ashtur", located near "chaukhandi of hazrat khalil ullah" around a distance of 1 km barid shahi tombs chaukhandi of hazrat khalil ullah
