bihar-sharif
Heritage and important sites[edit]
heritage and important sites[edit]
a picture of badi dargah
temple on badi pahari bihar sharif
tomb of syed ibrahim mallick baya
the city of bihar sharif also has the designation of the location of the first museum in bihar. the first bihar museum, established here in the late 19th century by alexander meyrick broadley was not just the oldest museum in bihar but also one of the oldest in india. broadley was the district magistrate of bihar sharif in 1860s and one of the earliest surveyors and explorers of bihar. during the course of his amateur excavations, he collected many sculptures and architectural fragments, with which he established a museum at the collector's bungalow at bihar sharif in 1871–1872. the collection recorded at least 686 artefacts. in 1891, the governor of bengal of decided to transfer the contents of the bihar museum to indian museum in calcutta. after the foundation of patna museum, a significant part of the collection was transferred there, listed in the catalogue as from broadley collection.
the bihar sharif pillar inscriptions from the gupta empire were found in front of the northern gate of the fort of bihar (bihar sharif). the pillar was removed and set up on a brick pedestal opposite the bihar court house, and then later transferred to the patna museum.
the city has many artefacts and relics of buddhist and jain heritage. mahavira, often regarded as the founder of jainism, is said to have attained nirvana at the nearby town of pawapuri, where the famous jal mandir is situated. broken idols of buddha and mahavira can be found in the nalanda museum and in many temples. nalanda college in bihar sharif and the locality of garhpar are situated on the remains of odantapuri. the ruins at nalanda are 13 km (8.1 mi) from bihar sharif.
baba maniram akhara
another notable site in the city is the langot fair at baba maniram akhara; the akhara of sant maniram was founded by raja biththal to train youth in fighting.
the mausoleum of syed ibrahim mallick baya
the mausoleum of syed ibrahim mallick baya is presently located on the top of the hill known as hiranya parvata. it was built in 14th century ce.
badi dargah
the shrine of the sufi saint sheikh makhdoom sharfuddin ahmed yahya maneri, is located near the ruins of odantapuri. he is credited with converting many hindus in the districts of patna, bihar sharif, gaya, jehanabad, arwal, nawada, jamui and sheikhpura, and many muslims celebrate urs at the shrine each year in the month of shawwal on the hijri calendar. the inscription over its entrance mentions that the tomb was completed in 1569.
badi pahari
badi pahadi, also known as hiranya parvat, has a large park, a temple and the mausoleum of syed ibrahim mallick baya located on it. most tourists visiting biharsharif are domestic - from other places in bihar and adjoining states.
bihar sharif museum
housed in the building known as "virasat bihar", this museum opened in 1979 and housing relics and sculptures unearthed from the city and nearby areas as the area is very rich in archaeological remains. the stone sculptures housed here mostly belong to the pala empire period. there are medieval period sculptures, ancient pillars, islamic inscriptions and mughal coins.
vajra vidya phulahari thrangu monastery
a buddhist monastery located on nh 20 near hiranya parvat.
mora talab
a large tank said to be constructed by queen moora devi, mother of the mauryan emperor chandragupta maurya. a sun temple is located here. this place is located by the nh 20 on the northern side of the city.
nagar nigam park
nagar nigam park is a park developed by the municipal corporation of bihar sharif on badi pahadi. the park features several fountains and cascades along with a children's park.
