bihar-sharif
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
roadways[edit]
the city is connected by road to major cities like patna, rajgir, nalanda, nawada, harnaut, jamshedpur, ranchi, dhanbad, bokaro, koderma, kolkata, gaya, hazaribag, barhi, jehanabad, bakhtiyarpur, barh, mokama, munger, purnea and ramgarh. being the district headquarters, it is a major transport hub and has regular bus service to all other major destinations in the region.
nh 33 and nh 20, a part of asian highway network and ah42 passes through the city. nh 33 and nh 20 intersects each other in the city. nh 20 connects to patna via bakhtiyarpur and to nawada, barhi, koderma, hazaribagh and ranchi. nh 33 connects the city to mokama, barbigha, asthawan, jahanabad and arwal.
nh 120 starts here and runs to dumraon via nalanda, rajgir and gaya.
sh 78 connects it with chandi, daniyawan and hilsa.
public transport[edit]
bihar sharif is a part of the intercity bus service of bihar state road transport corporation and patna city bus service. so, state-owned intercity bus services to the state capital patna is available at very short intervals. bsrtc also provides city bus services from bihar sharif to rajgir, nawada, barh and  jamui.
bihar sharif also comes under the first intercity electric bus service in bihar as a part of patna - rajgir route started in march 2021.
railways[edit]
bihar sharif junction
bihar sharif junction is on the bakhtiyarpur-tilaiya line, part of the national broad gauge network. the city is served by the shramjeevi express, a direct daily train to new delhi. there are also numerous passenger and express connections to the state capital, patna, and to the hub at rajgir which connects to many destinations in the country. recently, the fatuha–islampur branch line has been connected to this route by linking daniyawan to bihar sharif. the extension of passenger services to link bihar sharif with hilsa, sheikhpura and gaya began in 2013.
airways[edit]
the nearest airport is patna airport, about 86 km away, with carriers operating flights to major indian cities. gaya international airport is about 95 km away.
