bijapur
About the city[edit]
about the city[edit]
this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (january 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
the place is an important tourist place in the country, the former capital of the adilshahi dynasty, situated about 579 km (360 mi) to the north-west of bangalore. the gadag–solapur railway line traverses via this place. the kalyani chalukya kings made it a sub-capital according to an inscription of 1073. it is believed that jain poet nagachandra, 12th century, had his residence here. the place had old names like vijayapura, vidyapura and mohamudpura. for nearly 200 years from 1489 to 1686, this was the seat of the adilshahi dynasty. among the other historical attractions at bijapur, some notable ones are the anand mahal, jod gumbaz, jumma masjid, saat manzil, and jal manzil. also among old houses at bijapur, the most famous is elavia house (nauzer elavia) which is more than 100 years old. bijapur city was also held by aurangzeb, the nizam, savanur nawab, satara chatrapati and finally the british. foreign travellers like duarte barbosa, varthema, poser, mandeslo and travernier visited this place. the ibrahim rouza and the gol gumbaz are the most impressive monuments at bijapur. a brief survey of spots of note in the city is given below. ain-ul-mulk's tomb and mosque lies on the eastern outskirts of the city and is the solid structure in square, surrounded by a fair proportioned dome. the tomb belongs to ain-ul-mulk. close by this the much adorned mosque and the building is plastered. ali adil shah i's tomb lies in the south-west part of the city. ali adilshah's tomb is a simple modest building containing an outer row of five arches surrounding a central chamber and is the earliest royal mausoleum in bijapur. ali adil sha ii's tomb is located to the north-west of the citadel, and is housed in a big square roofless structure consisting of incomplete arches in dark basalt. this incomplete structure is 215 feet (66 m) square and on the raised platform stand the incomplete arches. in the centre on the elevated platform are the tombs. ali shahi pir's mosque and tomb is a square massive structure, its mihrab is remarkable in some ways. the tomb of the saint is outside the north-east gate of the mosque. khwaja amin dargah is considered as the most sacred in the city and is situated about 1.5 km (0.93 mi) to the west of bijapur.  the tomb of khwaja amin-ud-din is on the high ground and conspicuous landmark for considerable distance round about. anand mahal is to the west of gagan mahal and in the premises of the citadel stands this two-storeyed mansion. this was constructed by ibrahim adil sha ii in 1589, exclusively for music and dance. the roof was ornamented with stucco work. the ananda mahal presently is being used by the state for government offices. andu masjid stands a little away from the citadel to the west of the jumanal road. it is a two-storeyed structure, upper floor being a prayer chamber while the ground is a hall. there is no pulpit in the mosque and probably it was restricted to the prayer of women. a persian inscription here quotes that the mosque was constructed in 1608 by itbar khan, one of the nobles in the court of adil shai ii. aras mahal is to the south-east of adalat mahal and was once a joy resort of ali ii. it is now the residence of the district surgeon. ark-killa the citadel is at the centre of the city. it is also most important part of bijapur. yusuf adilshah chose it as the site for his fort. the present citadel is nearly circular. its defences are a strong wall with several bastions of considerable strength on the south and east. asar mahal on the crest of the eastern glacis of the citadel is the asar mahal. in about 1646 it was constructed by muhammad shah and was earlier called as adalat mahal. the walls and ceilings of the rooms bear paintings of landscapes and various designs. the room of the south side of the gilded hall is a gorgeously painted apartment. these paintings had been whitewashed by the orders of aurangzeb and later restored. there is a big square tank outside in front of the building. aurangzeb idgah is a large square enclosure built by aurangzeb in 1682 after the occupation of the city as a gathering place for muslims on important days. bukhari masjid is believed to have been constructed by chandbibi for a moulvi of the bukhari family. on the door of the masjid there is a persian inscription. chand bavadi is a well constructed by ali adil shah i in honour of his wife chand bibi in the year 1579. it is at the west corner of the town. the entrance is spanned by a single arch, approached by a descending flight of steps. chota asar is a small building, remarkable for the amount of rich ornamentation in stucco which covers the wall, ceiling and a portion of the façade. chini mahal or faroukh mahal is an edifice that consists of a big lofty durbar hall in the centre and series of rooms in the wings. yusuf adil shah constructed it. for its sheer size and loftiness none of the hall in any other palace of bijapur can be compared with it.
