bijapur
Sufis of Bijapur[edit]
sufis of bijapur[edit]
tomb or dargah of sufi saint hazrat murtuza quadri located at western side bijapur
arrival of sufis in the  bijapur region was started during the reign of qutbuddin aibak. during this period deccan was under the control of native hindu rulers and palegars. shaikh haji roomi was the first to arrive in bijapur with his companions. although his other comrades like shaikh salahuddin, shaikh saiful mulk and syed haji makki were settled in pune, haidra and tikota respectively.
according to tazkiraye auliyae dakkan i.e., biographies of the saints of the deccan, compiled by abdul jabbar mulkapuri in 1912–1913,
sufi sarmast was one of the earliest sufi of this region. he came to the deccan from arabia in the 13th century at a time when the deccan was a land of unbelievers with no sign of islam or correct faith anywhere. his companions, pupils (fakir), disciples (murid), and soldiers (ghazi), numbered over seven hundred. he settled in sagar in solapur district. there, a zealous and anti-muslim raja named kumaram (kumara rama) wished to expel sufi sarmast, and his companions having also prepared to a struggle, a bitter fight ensued. heroes on both sides were slain. finally the raja was killed by the hand of his daughter. countless hindus were killed, and at this time lakhi khan afghan and nimat khan came from delhi to assist him. hindus were defeated and the muslims were victorious. the rest of the hindus, having accepted tributary status, made peace. since by nature he was fundamentally not combative, sufi sarmast spread the religion of mohammed and befriended the hearts of hindus. having seen his fine virtue s and uncommon justice, many hindus of that time accepted islam, finally he died in the year a.h.680 i.e., 1281 a.d.
after this period arrival of sufis in bijapur and suburbs was started. ainuddin gahjul ilm dehelvi narrates that ibrahim sangane was one of the early sufis of bijapur parish.  sufis of bijapur can be divided into three categories according to period of their arrival viz., sufis before bahmani and / or adil shahi dynasty, sufis during adil shahi dynasty and sufis after the fall of adil shahi dynasty. and further it can be classified as sufis as warriors, sufis as social reformers, sufis as scholars, poets and writers.
ibrahim zubairi writes in his book rouzatul auliyae beejapore (compiled during 1895) which describes that more than 30 tombs or dargahs are there in bijapur with more than 300 khankahs  i.e., islamic missionary schools with notable number of disciples of different lineage like hasani sadat, husaini sadat, razavi sadat, kazmi sadat, shaikh siddiquis, farooquis, usmanis, alvis, abbasees  and other and spiritual chains like quadari, chishti, suharwardi, naqshbandi, shuttari, haidari  etc.
