bijapur
Education[edit]
education[edit]
bijapur is emerging as a hub for professional education. previously (i.e. before the 1980s) there were very few professional educational institutions. along with the professional colleges there are many colleges which provide under-graduate and post-graduate degrees in the faculty of applied science, pure science, social-sciences and humanities. college of agriculture, bijapur, [1] hittinalli farm affiliated university of agricultural sciences, dharwad is one of the leading educational and research institutes in the field of agriculture, which is offering undergraduate and postgraduate courses in various disciplines of agriculture.
engineering colleges are affiliated to visvesvaraya technological university viz, b.l.d.e.a's v.p. dr. p.g. halakatti college of engineering and technology and secab college of engineering and technology
al ameen medical college is affiliated to rajiv gandhi university of health sciences. bldea's b.m.patil medical college, hospital and research centre is a deemed university recognised by ugc.  other professional colleges run by blde association are bldea's college of pharmacy and college of nursing sciences affiliated to rguhs.
many of colleges except professional are affiliated to rani chennamma university belgaum viz, b.l.d.e.a's a.s.patil college of commerce(autonomous)mba programme, bijapur. rani chennamma university has a post-graduation centre at bijapur also.
first women's university in the state of karnataka is located at bijapur. various post-graduate courses like mba, mca are conducted here. additionally bijapur has the first sainik school in the state, the second being in kodagu. this is a very reputed residential school preparing cadets for the defence forces and grooming students very well in many fields. and there many private computer training institutes providing computer education.
the bijapur district is known for its mosques, structural monuments, art and architectural heritages, archaeological sites and cave temples. with the objective to spread education in this area, karnatak university opened its post-graduate centre in 1993.
karnataka state women's university[edit]
karnataka state women's university, established in 2003 in the city of bijapur is the only women's university in karnataka dedicated exclusively for women's education. it is recognised under 2(f) and 12(b) of the ugc act. seventy women's colleges spread in twelve districts of north-karnataka are affiliated to this university. the university offers various ug programmes leading to bachelor's degree in arts, business administration, computer applications, commerce, education, fashion technology, home science, physical education, science and social work. it also offers 20 p g courses, p g diploma and certificate courses in the faculties of arts, commerce and management, social sciences, science and technology and education.
ignou bijapur regional center[edit]
bijapur has ignou regional center, there are 7 districts under its jurisdiction (districts bagalkote, bijapur, bidar, gulbarga, koppal, raichur and yadagiri). the newly created bijapur regional centre would cater to seven northern districts.
bijapur ignou regional center
