bilaspur-chhattisgarh
this article is about the municipality in india. for its namesake district, see bilaspur district.

for other places with the same name, see bilaspur (disambiguation).
this article needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "bilaspur, chhattisgarh" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (october 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)

metropolis in chhattisgarh, india
bilaspurmetropoliscity of festivals, law capital of chhattisgarhfrom top, left to right: rama magneto mall,  chhattisgarh high court, central library, bilaspur junction railway station , rama sky life, bhim kichak temple, malhar, mahamaya temple, arpa river, bilaspur airport,  khutaghat reservoir ; hotel east park.nickname: judicial capitalbilaspurlocation in chhattisgarh, indiabilaspurbilaspur (india)show map of chhattisgarhshow map of indiashow allcoordinates: 22°05′n 82°09′e﻿ / ﻿22.09°n 82.15°e﻿ / 22.09; 82.15coordinates: 22°05′n 82°09′e﻿ / ﻿22.09°n 82.15°e﻿ / 22.09; 82.15country indiastatechhattisgarhdistrictbilaspurnamed forbilasa baigovernment • bodybilaspur municipal corporation (bmc) • mayorramsharan yadav (inc) • district collectordr. saransh mittar (ias)area • total205 km (79 sq mi) • rank2ndelevation207 m (679 ft)population (2011)750,000 • rank87thlanguages • officialchhattisgarhi, hinditime zoneutc+5:30 (ist)pin495xxx (bilaspur)telephone code 3122107752vehicle registrationcg-10websitewww.bilaspur.nic.in
bilaspur, also known as "the city of festivals", is a city located in bilaspur district in the indian state of chhattisgarh. bilaspur is the administrative headquarters of the bilaspur district and bilaspur division. the chhattisgarh high court, located at bodri, district bilaspur has privileged it with the title nyayadhani (law capital) of the state.  this city is the commercial center and business hub of north east chhattisgarh region. it is also an important city for the indian railways, as it is the headquarters for south east central railway zone (secr) and the bilaspur railway division. bilaspur is also the headquarters of south eastern coalfields limited. chhattisgarh biggest power plant operated by ntpc is in sipat. powergrid in sipat pools electricity from other power plants in region and transmits electricity to delhi via one of longest hvdc line.
bilaspur is known for its aromatic rice variety named ‘doobraj’ rice, handloom woven colourful soft kosa silk sarees. basic tasar silkworm seed organisation (btsso) (website) under the central silk board, government of india collects, executes the production and supply of nucleus and basic tasar seed from surrounding areas.
bilaspur is one of the 100 indian cities to be developed as a smart city under the smart cities mission.
