bilaspur-chhattisgarh
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
city-36 shopping mall, bilaspur
bilaspur is the center of electric power generation in india. bilaspur and the surrounding area generate 10,000 mw of electricity, and an additional 50,000 mw are planned in the next few years. as many as 22 companies are interested to tap an estimated power generation potential of 50,000 megawatts in the region. the railways have gotten a major boost with big energy sector players set to invest rs.5,000 crore in three proposed railways corridors around bilaspur. chhattisgarh is also known as "the rice bowl" – dhan ka katora. bilaspur is the centre of agri products. there are approx. 500 rice and dall mills in the surrounding area. in fy2022/21, the south east central railway zone, whose geography encompasses bilaspur, earned rs 14,2855.71 crore, "the highest among all of the railway divisians of indian railways". the bilaspur railways zone comprises the divisions of bilaspur, nagpur and raipur. south eastern coalfields limited (secl), a subsidiary of public sector unit coal india limited (cil) – a maharatna company, is situated with headquarters at bilaspur. secl is a miniratna psu under the ministry of coal, with several awards in its credentials including best psu award in 1997–98. an integrated action plan for development of civic infrastructure, including hi-tech water purifier system, proper drainage facilities and cleanliness, is being planned by the state government for cities and towns, while the proposed 'arpa project' would give a new life to the city of bilaspur, minister for urban administration and health amar agrawal said in an interview to the times of india, a leading newspaper of india. the state government has drawn up an ambitious plan of rs2,000 crore to develop the arpa river bank in bilaspur district during the next seven years. for this, the government has constituted a ‘special area development authority’ (sada) for the development of the arpa river bank near bilaspur city.
the government has invited proposals from interested national and international institutions for the development of the river bank on a ppp model. the authority has prepared a project for the development of the river and is now in search of organisations that would be interested in developing the river on a public private partnership (ppp).
according to sada, about 653 hectares of area on the banks of the river would be developed. this area is 13.4 km in length. commercial, residential, entertainment and other institutional facilities would be developed in this area. on both the sides of the river, 13.4-km-long retaining wall, houses and commercial complexes would be constructed, besides bridge, roads and walkways. water supply, sewerage, drainage, electricity supply would be provided in the area.
the estimated cost of all the works is rs2,000 crore. the development works would be taken up in phases during the next seven years.
of the total 653-hectare area, some of the land is owned privately. in lieu of acquisition of private land, the affected people would be given land at other areas. after development about 267 hectares of land will be made available for sale. by selling this land, the developer could recover the invested amount. the downtown is called gol bazaar (circular market). gol bazaar, sadar bazaar and company garden chowk are buzzing and vibrant but overcrowded with slow-moving traffic. in contrast there are some newly developed areas as well. the vyapar vihar is a newly developed commercial and goods transport area. bilaspur has chhattisgarh's first hi-tech bus stand at bodri.
it has the high court of chhattisgarh which is asia's largest court (in area).
industries: around bilaspur, there are many industrial areas, including tifra, sirgitti and silpahri industrial growth centres. sirgitti, silpahri and tifra around bilapur are major industrial areas near bilaspur. located on the outskirts of bilaspur city sirgitti industrial centre is spread over an area of approx. 338 hectares. with about 324 industries it provides direct employment to 4431 persons. silpahari industrial centre is another industrial area near bilaspur and is home to many sponge iron industries. tifra industrial area situated on the outskirts of bilaspur city is spread over an area of approx. 65 hectares. many chemical, pvc footwear, hdpe woven sacks, polythene bags and sheets, soft drinks and other units are located here. csidc or chhattisgarh state industrial development corporation limited is responsible for the development of maintenance of all these industrial areas in and around bilaspur. chhattisgarh laghu evam sahayak udyog sangh or clsus is an association of industries which represents all major industries of bilaspur and chhattisgarh. bec fertilizers – a unit of bhilai engineering corporation is situated in the sirgitti industrial area. power plants – bilaspur has india's second largest power plant of ntpc at sipat which generates power of 2980 mw with 3 units of 660 mw each and 1 unit of 1000 mw. many thermal power plants are coming up in the surrounding area of bilaspur. also notable are nova, ksk, gitanjali, mahanadi etc. legal: the day the state of chhattisgarh was constituted (1 november 2000) with its capital at raipur, the high court of chhattisgarh was established at bilaspur. it is the 19th high court of india. banks: all major indian banks have branches and atms in the city. sbi have approx. 80 atms in the city as of 2013. website: a website dedicated to provide information on bilaspur is maintained by nic. a new indoor stadium is under construction at behtarai road.
