bilaspur-chhattisgarh
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
show zoomed outshow zoomed midshow zoomed inshow all
rail[edit]
bilaspur railway station is a regional hub for the railway system.

it is the busiest junction of chhattisgarh and second busiest of central india after itarsi. it is 3rd cleanest railway station in india after surat and rajkot. it is the zonal head office of the south east central railway. it is well connected to the rest of the country through the indian railways. bilaspur railway station has the 4th longest railway platform in india after gorakhpur, kollam and kharagpur. the rajdhani express (bilaspur-new delhi) via bhopal bi-weekly connects bilaspur to new delhi. the station is on the tatanagar–bilaspur section of the howrah-nagpur-mumbai line and junction for another rail is towards delhi via katni.
daily connections are available for kolkata, mumbai, new delhi, pune, nagpur, ahmedabad, indore, bhopal, amritsar, agra, roorkee, haridwar, visakhapatnam, bhubaneswar, puri, tatanagar, patna, jabalpur, raipur, varanasi, jaipur, bikaner, udaipur, ajmer etc. it is also connected by. direct trains to thiruvananthapuram, kollam, chennai, ernakulam, tirupati, tirunelveli, bangalore, bhuj, gandhidham, okha, porbandar, dhanbad, hyderabad, jaipur, gorakhpur, shirdi, udaipur, bikaner, jammu, jodhpur, guwahati, kanpur, lucknow, ranchi, guwahati and many other cities and towns in india. many local trains are running here daily for small station passengers
other railway stations present near bilaspur city are:
uslapur chakarbhata dadhapara gatora godam
uslapur is the other major city station which is 8 km from the main junction station and here is loco training centre for loco drivers in which trainees from various part of the central comes and express trains in bilaspur-katni rail line stop at uslapur, while the other three are for local-passenger trains only and godam is for goods trains.
the government of india is planning to lay some new lines from bilaspur. surveys of the following routes are ongoing:
katghora−ratanpur−mungeli−kawardha−dongargarh gevra-katghora-pendra road bilaspur-gatora-dipka-katghora
bilaspur railway station (chhatisgarh,india) and shri rabindranath tagore
recently government of india has approved fourth railway line between bilaspur and jharsuguda which is presently a triple line section between durg jn to champa. third railway line between bilaspur and katni is under construction. the survey of fourth railway line between bilaspur and nagpur is underway. most upgrades are to handle coal evacuation from coal mining areas in east india to power plants in west of bilaspur.
air[edit]
bilasa devi kevat airport, bilaspur
air travel is also accessible from bilaspur. the bilaspur airport was inaugurated in march 2021. the airport has a 5,000 ft runway and a small terminal building. currently, . there are direct flights from bilaspur to jabalpur, bhopal, delhi and prayagraj.
road[edit]
bilaspur nh 49
the city is connected with mumbai and kolkata through national highway network. bilaspur is on nh-130 connecting raipur and ambikapur. nh-49 starts from bilaspur and ends at kharagpur. another national highway nh 130 a is newly announced which starts from bilaspur and end at podi via mungeli kawardha. nh-45 connects bilaspur with jabalpur and bhopal. other state highways are sh 7 and sh 5.
nh no  route   nh 45  bhopal » jabalpur » amarkantak >> bilaspur   nh 49  bilaspur » raigarh »  jharsuguda >> kharagpur   nh 130  raipur >> simga >> bilaspur » katghora » ambikapur   nh 130a  pondi >> mungeli >> bilaspur » sipat » dharamjayagarh >> pathalgaon
ec-7: raipur-dhanbad economic corridors of india  or industrial corridors of india is identified under bharatmala road network and passes through bilaspur - baloda - urga.
there are regular buses and taxis available to all nearby major cities and towns. bilaspur bus stand is known as hi-tech bus stand. for local transportation three-wheeled, black and yellow auto rickshaws, referred to as autos, are popular. no diesel auto are allowed in railway limits due to large pollution created by it.  large no. of private bus operators runs their buses on various routes. it is well connected with other cities by road. bus services available for allahabad, jashpur, ambikapur, raipur, jagdalpur, korba, nagpur, durg-bhilai, mungeli, kawardha, jabalpur, raigarh, narayanpur, kondagaon, etc. in short, it is connected with all 27 districts of state and some major cities of other states like jabalpur, varanasi, allahabad, nagpur, gondia, mandla, anuppur, shehdol, jharsugda, sambalpur, bhawanipatna, hyedrabad etc. more than 2500 buses are running through bilaspur.
ola cabs are also running in metropolis area. local transportation also includes man-powered cycle rickshaw. bilaspur city has many city buses, more than 85 city buses are running in city. 60 big luxurious sml bus, 10 tata starbus mini bus, 10 red coloured world class ac tata marcopolo city bus, and 5 pink city bus which are only for females are running successfully. more than 35 city bus stops are developed in city and surrounding area. all 85 city buses are world class international level bus which have gps, cctv camera and digital naming board. city buses are allowed to run 20 kmph faster than other buses. all city buses starts from bilaspur junction railway station and at night they stays at koni city bus terminal. the city buses runs from the railway station to connect with various parts of city facilitating easy and cheap conveyance to the people. these bus services are available from 06.30 am to 8.00 pm. city bus services facilitates the people even to reach near by cities like ratanpur, takhatpur, kota, malhar (a holy place known for mata didneshwari devi temple), seepat (ntpc colony sipat), bilha & chakarbhata etc.
