bilaspur-chhattisgarh
Tourist attractions[edit]
tourist attractions[edit]
temple carvings in malhar bilaspur chhattisgarh
various archeological sites and temples in bilaspur attract tourists from all over the world. there are more than 20 centrally protected monuments and sites by archaeological survey of india. achanakmar wildlife sanctuary is one of the renowned ecotourism spots in chhattisgarh. hasdev bango dam is 105 km from bilaspur. malhar and ratanpur are the centre of archeology. ruins of forts to ancient temples are found here. talagram is the location for the "deorani-jethani" temple. bubble island and radhika water park are the parks which amuse the local people as well as tourists. belpan has a huge pond as well as samadhi. khutaghat is a scenic spot and is wanted by nature lovers. forests, dam and hills comprise the surrounding of khutaghat. kabir chobutara at a distance of 41 km from bilaspur is a hub for mahatmas (saints). bilaspur is situated on the banks of the arpa, the main river. leelagar and maniyari are other small rivers of the district. sonmuda is another tourist attraction which gives a panoramic view of valleys, hills and forest. the river sone originates from sonmuda. places of interest in and around bilaspur include:
malhar, which is of historical significance, as it was visited by xuanzang, the chinese historian. it is situated at 40 km. by road from bilaspur. in malhar, so many ancient temples have been found by extraction such as pataleshwar temple, devri temple and dindeshwari temple. the four-handed idol of lord vishnu is also significant as it is the earliest sculptural representation malhar has a museum also. amarkantak – the narmada river and son river originate from amarkantak. kanan pendari zoo. (within city limits) tala, 20 km away, is famous for rudra shiva. ratanpur for its mahamaya temple and ram tekri mandir. according to holidayiq.com ratanpur ranked no. 1 of 19 places in bilaspur to visit. ancient shiva temple near kirari godhi, 11th-12th century ad lord shiva ‘dhoom nath’ ‘dumeshvari devi’ temple at sargaon,  bilaspur  on nh130 highway 12th century kalchuri shri aiyyappa mandir (sani dosha haarak) near tifra over bridge (bhartiya nagar). mungeli maa mahamaya temple. malhar, chhattisgarh – 10th century ancient hindu and jain temples. the four handed idol of vishnu is significant. the remains found here are of the period from approximately 1000 bce to the ratnapura kalachuri regime. pali – mahadev temple smriti vatika dams khudiya dam, lormi, and khutaghat dam, ratanpur. rani sati temple, a religious temple built in the city of bilaspur by the marwaris where the deity of jhunjhunu's temple is worshipped. two amusement parks are also here. (bubble island and radhika water park) smritivan and urja park are also situated in rajkishore nagar area of the city. maa didneshwari devi temple, malhar. maa marimai temple is also a temple of bilaspur.
6th 7th century bhima kichak temple, malhar chhattisgarh india - 31
