bongaigaon
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
air[edit]
the nearest domestic and international airport is lokpriya gopinath bordoloi international airport, guwahati.
new bongaigaon railway junction (front view)
railways[edit]

see also: new bongaigaon railway station
bongaigaon falls under the northeast frontier railway zone of the indian railways network. there are two stations in bongaigaon: new bongaigaon railway station (the second largest railway junction in assam) and bongaigaon (old) station. major trains serving bongaigaon with major cities are the dibrugarh rajdhani express, poorvottar sampark kranti express, saraighat express, brahmaputra mail, north-east express, guwahati bangalore express, guwahati ernakulam express, and kamrup express. it is the largest station in western assam after guwahati. according to the 2012 budget, new bongaigaon jn. is considered to be the adarsh station of india.
biodiversity special train name science express stands on a platform of new bongaigaon railway junction
dibrugrah-new delhi rajdhani express on the platform no.3 of new bngn jn. station
construction of the 265 km (165 mi) long 5 ft 6 in (1,676 mm) broad gauge siliguri-jogihopa line, between 1963 and 1965, brought broad gauge railways to assam. this was also the reason for constructing the new bongaigaon railway station.
a new railway track from new bongaigaon to guwahati was commissioned in 1984.
saraighat bridge opened in 1962. it initially carried a metre gauge track, which was later replaced by broad gauge.
roadways[edit]
national highway 31 connects bongaigaon with the states of bihar, jharkhand and west bengal. national highway 37 via naranarayan setu from goalpara in assam to dimapur in nagaland traverses the entire length of assam and connects bongaigaon with almost all the major cities of assam, including jorhat and dibrugarh. national highways 31c and 37 both connect bongaigaon with guwahati. there are several bus terminals in the city, providing connections with major cities of assam such as basugaon, mangaldai, gossaigaon, dhubri, barpeta, tezpur, goalpara, abhayapuri, kokrajhar, bijni, siliguri, cooch behar and guwahati.
infrastructure[edit]

see also: bir chilarai flyover, bongaigaon city
night view of bir chilarai flyover
in 2010 bongaigaon city built the bir chilarai flyover, to address the city's busy railway and road traffic, connecting three parts of the city:
new bongaigaon with the western part of bongaigaon the north part of bongaigaon city with the centre of bongaigaon new bongaigaon with the northern part of bongaigaon city
