bongaigaon
History[edit]
history[edit]
bijni kingdom[edit]
the area was ruled by zamindars hailing from the koch belonging to indo-mongoloid ethnic group of peoples from the 15th century to the end of princely states in 1956.
administrative changes under british rule[edit]
the original goalpara district was first created in 1822 by david scott, an employee of the east india company and the first commissioner of newly created north east rangpur district headquarters at rangpur town (now in bangladesh). the newly created goalpara district was connected with north-east rangpur district for administration. the area, formerly part of the bijni kingdom, which included the undivided garo hills district constituted the undivided goalpara district area in 1822. in 1866, garo hills was separated from the goalpara district area, and in the same year a new district named "greater koch behar" was created and the remaining portion of goalpara district was withdrawn from rangpur and tagged with koch behar. in 1874 a new province, the assam valley province, was created by the british government, and goalpara district area was withdrawn from koch behar and tagged with assam province, which continues until today. the original goalpara district is now split into five districts: goalpara, dhubri, kokrajhar, bongaigoan, and chirang.
creation of bongaigaon and modern era[edit]
evening skyline of bongaigaon city, paglasthan
on 14 march 1989, bombs from separatist tribal militants exploded in bongaigaon, killing 17 and wounding at least 48.
the government of assam decided in 1989 to create a new district of bongaigaon, carving out some areas of the goalpara and kokrajhar districts with its headquarters located at bongaigaon. on 29 september 1989, the creation of bongaigaon district was declared by the government of assam with its headquarters at bongaigaon. in 2005, the government of assam declared bongaigaon to be a city.
in june 2022, heavy floods in assam affected the residents of bongaigaon.
