bongaigaon
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
a park in bongaigaon
media and technology[edit]
the most popular assamese newspaper of assam, asomiya pratidin, is published from bongaigaon along with guwahati, dibrugarh and north lakhimpur.
indian oil corporation limited[edit]
the bongaigaon refinery is the eighth largest refinery of indian oil. formed upon the amalgamation of bongaigaon refinery and petrochemicals limited (brpl) with indian oil on 25 march 2009, bongaigaon refinery is situated at dhaligaon in chirang district of assam, 200 km west of guwahati.
bongaigaon refinery main gate side of national highway no. 31 (a1)
it has two crude distillation units (cdu), two delayed coker units, and a coke calcination unit (ccu) with a processing capacity of 2.35 million tonnes per year of crude oil. the first cdu with a capacity of 1 million tonnes per year was commissioned in 1979. the capacity was increased to 1.35 million tonnes per year in 1986. an lpg bottling plant with a capacity of 44 million tonnes per year was commissioned in 2003.
the refinery produces a wide range of petroleum products, namely lpg, naphtha, ms, sko, hsd, ldo, lshs, lvfo, rpc, cpc, needle coke and solvents (petrosol and bonmex-ii) by processing assam crude and ravva crude (from the ravva oil fields of the krishna godavari basin). bongaigaon refinery has developed an ecological park and a pond surrounding it containing 65,000 cubic metres of water, through which the storm water drains of the plant are routed for final discharge. another natural pond with a capacity of 30,000 cubic meters of water has been developed into an ecological reserve for migratory birds. a rainwater harvesting system has been installed in the bongaigaon township complex and the installation of solar water heating systems and solar photovoltaic streetlights is underway. bongaigaon refinery has received several awards for its ecological efforts, including a national award for "prevention of pollution" from the ministry of environment and forests on 16 september 2010, the indira gandhi paryavaran puruskar from the ministry of environment in 2006, and the greentech environment excellence gold award in 2008.
evening view of bgr township gate no. 2
bongaigaon refinery township (bgr township)[edit]

see also: bgr township, india
bgr township is a residential campus for employees of the indian oil corporation bgr. the town is located in dhaligaon near bongaigaon refinery. in the township there are two schools (bgr hs school and dps dhaigaon) and two clubs, rccc club & auditorium and champa club & play hub.
mayapuri cinema, mayapuri city centre
