bongaigaon
Landmarks[edit]
landmarks[edit]
entertainment and commercial centres[edit]
mayapuri cinema, as seen from outside
the city has two movie theatres: jolly max theater and mayapuri cinema. there are various public markets in different parts of the city.
koyakujia bil[edit]
view of koya kujia lake
koya kujia eco park, a natural body of water converted into an eco park by the district rural development agency of bongaigaon, is a tourist attraction situated near abhayapuri about 15 kilometers from bongaigaon, open since september 2008. the park consists of many small islands with myriad flora and fauna, including many migratory birds.
bagheswari temple[edit]
bagheswari temple
bagheshwari temple is a temple devoted to goddess durga for followers of the hindu religion in western assam. the temple is located in the centre of the city, in borpara. according to legend, the king of abhayapuri decided to build a temple after a sword was found at the site. the name of the temple means "devoted to the tiger" (bagh), taken from a nearby hill, bagheswari pahar, where tigers lived as late as the middle of the 20th century.
bagheswari hill[edit]
bagheswari hill, situated in the middle of the city, has a shiv temple at its peak, and elevated views of the whole city.
kakoijana forest reserve[edit]
a golden langur in kakoijana reserved forest
covering an area of around 20 km to the south-east of the city, the park is known for its populations of golden langur and birds.
manas national park[edit]
manas national park
bongaigaon city is the entry point for the manas national park and wildlife sanctuary, a unesco listed natural world heritage site, a project tiger reserve, an elephant reserve and a biosphere reserve. located in the himalayan foothills, it is contiguous with the royal manas national park in bhutan. the park is home to rare and endangered endemic wildlife such as the assam roofed turtle, hispid hare, golden langur and pygmy hog, and is well-known for its population of wild water buffalo.
