bulandshahr
History[edit]
history[edit]
early history[edit]
growse's discoveries in the 1880s showed that baran was inhabited by buddhists between 400 and 600 ad.
the kingdom of baran came to an end probably during the 12th century. in 1192 ce when muhammad ghauri conquered parts of india, his general qutubuddin aibak surrounded fort baran and conquered it and the raja chandrasen dodiya was killed and aibak took control of the baran kingdom.
the ancient ruins found at places in bhatora veerpur, ghalibpur, etc. are indicative of the antiquity of bulandshahr. there are several other important places in the district from where statues belonging to the medieval age and objects of ancient temples have been found. even today, several of these historical and ancient objects such as coins, inscriptions etc. are preserved in the state museum lucknow.
british rule[edit]
raja lachhman singh (1826–1896), who served the government from 1847 and wrote a statistical memoir of the bulandshahr district, moved to bulandshahr following retirement.
indian rebellion of 1857[edit]
a large number of ahir, gurjar and rajput rulers, called zamindars, rebelled and attacked bulandshahr itself on 21 may 1857. the gurjars and rajputs plundered multiple towns such as secunderabad. they burnt down telegraph lines and dak bungalows. the rebelling nawab, walidad khan also belonged from bulandshahr. the presence of nawab walidad khan in bulandshahr had completely paralysed the british about this time. the rebels had secured a mud fort under walidad khan at malagarh.
the indian rebellion of 1857 is generally associated with the surrounding areas, such as meerut, delhi and aligarh. on 20 may 1857, the 9th regiment of bulandshahr looted the treasury at bulandshahr. sir alfred comyn lyall was subsequently appointed assistant magistrate of bulandshahr, and lord roberts was also present in the district.
hindi scholar, archaeologist and district magistrate and collector of bulandshahr from 1876 to 1884, frederic growse, resided at collector's house, bulandshahr. in 1884 he published bulandshahr; or, sketches of an indian district; social, historical and architectural.
raja babu park had been constructed in bulandshahr in 1837, and a statue of queen victoria was placed there in 1901, when the park was renamed ‘maharani victoria park’.
garden gate, bulandshahr (1880s)       town hall bulandshahr. north verandah (chunni lál)       collector's house, bulandshahr, image from text of 1886.
