chandigarh
Government and politics[edit]
government and politics[edit]
punjab and haryana high court by le corbusier
administrator of the union territory[edit]
article 239 of the constitution of india provides for the administration of the union territories by the president through an administrator. since 1984 the governor of punjab has served concurrently as the administrator of chandigarh. banwarilal purohit is the administrator of the union territory since september 2021.
politics[edit]
chandigarh, as a union territory, is not entitled to a state-level election: thus state assembly elections are not held and it is directly controlled by the central government. one seat for chandigarh is allocated in the lok sabha elections held every five years.
kirron kher (bjp) is the member of parliament elected in 2019 from the chandigarh lok sabha constituency.
civic administration[edit]
the city is governed by a civic administration or local government headed by municipal commissioner anindita mitra and mayor sarbjit kaur. the city comprises 35 wards represented by 35 elected councillors, and also nominates 9 councillors.
on 27 march 2022, union home minister amit shah announced that the chandigarh employees who were working under the punjab service rules until 2022, would be working under the central civil services rules from 1 april 2022. the move was criticised by political parties such as the aap, the inc and the akali dal.
composition of chandigarh municipal corporation after 2021 chandigarh municipal corporation election as of december 2021:
composition of chandigarh municipal corporation   party seats seats +/−     aam aadmi party 14 14     bharatiya janata party 14  6     indian national congress 6 3     shiromani akali dal 1      nominated  9      member of parliament  1
civic utilities[edit]
the prime responsibilities of the civic body municipal corporation chandigarh, are to ensure cleanliness and sanitation in the city, illumination of street lights, maintenance of parks, and sewerage disposal. the city has both brick and pipe sewers laid in four phases. in september 2020, the civic body announced that it would upgrade and renew the 50-year-old sewerage system. the pilot project for the 24x7 water supply is expected to begin in chandigarh in may 2021, which was initially to start in september 2020 and end in march 2022. on 8 april 2021, the chandigarh smart city ltd (cscl) board is yet to take the final decision.
in 2021, the bjp ruled corporation had increased the water tariff by 1.5 to 2.5 times. this created a widespread discontent among the residents.
in 2021, there was an acute shortage of parking spaces. the problem was aggravated by an increase of 17% in parking rates by the municipal corporation. the increase in the waste collection charges, water tariff and property tax rates during the last five years 2016 to 2021 were unpopular among the public.
cleanliness[edit]
in 2016, chandigarh was the second cleanest city of india. in the years that followed, garbage from the city was not disposed of properly. the lack of a proper process or mechanism led to the garbage piled up at the dadu majra garbage dump site.
in 2021, chandigarh fell 66 positions in the list of cleanest cities in india, once a point of pride for the city. the fall in cleanliness became an important poll issue. the residents were upset with the downfall in the cleanliness.
the government's handling of the covid-19 pandemic in india damaged the bjp's image as the voters felt that they were not given desired help in getting the hospital beds and medical oxygen from their elected representatives. the sitting councillors were accused of not being found to be approachable when the public needed support. complaints that no major relief measure was taken by the local government were raised.
