chandigarh
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
farmers' market in chandigarh
chandigarh has been rated as one of the "wealthiest towns" of india. the reserve bank of india ranked chandigarh as the third-largest deposit centre and seventh largest credit centre nationwide as of june 2012. with an average household yearly income of ₹199,000 (us$2,500), chandigarh is one of the richest towns in india. chandigarh's gross state domestic product for 2014–15 is estimated at $0.29 trillion (short scale) (us$4.3 billion) at current prices. according to a 2014 survey, chandigarh is ranked 4th in the top 50 cities identified globally as "emerging outsourcing and it services destinations" ahead of cities like beldon (amritsar).
employment[edit]
the government is a major employer in chandigarh, with three governments having their base here, those being the chandigarh administration, the punjab government and the haryana government. a significant percentage of chandigarh's population, therefore, consists of people who are either working for one of these governments or have retired from government service, mainly armed forces. for this reason, chandigarh is often called a "pensioner's paradise". ordnance cable factory of the ordnance factories board has been set up by the government of india. there is about 15 medium-to-large industries, including two in the public sector. in addition, chandigarh has over 2,500 units registered under the small-scale sector. the city's important industries are paper manufacturing, basic metals and alloys, and machinery. other industries in the city are food products, sanitary ware, auto parts, machine tools, pharmaceuticals, and electrical appliances.
the main occupation here is trade and business. however, the punjab and haryana high court, post graduate institute of medical education and research (pgimer), the availability of an it park, and more than a hundred government schools provide other job opportunities to people.
four major trade promotion organisations have their offices in chandigarh. these are the associated chambers of commerce & industry, assocham india in sector 8, chandigarh, federation of indian chambers of commerce & industry, (ficci) the phd chamber of commerce and industry and the confederation of indian industry (cii) which has its regional headquarters at sector 31, chandigarh.
chandigarh it park (also known as rajiv gandhi chandigarh technology park) is the city's attempt to break into the information technology world. chandigarh's infrastructure, proximity to delhi, haryana, punjab, and himachal pradesh, and the it talent pool attracts it businesses looking for office space in the area. major indian firms and multinational corporations like quark, infosys, evry, techmahindra, airtel, amadeus it group, dlf have set up base in the city and its suburbs.
the work of the chandigarh metro was slated to start by 2019. it was opposed by the member of parliament from chandigarh, kirron kher. with an estimated cost of around $109 billion including 50% funds from the governments of punjab and haryana and 25% from chandigarh and government of india, funds from the japanese government were proposed to include approximately 56% of the cost. however, the project was turned down owing to its non-feasibility. kher promised a film city for chandigarh. after winning the seat, she said that she had difficulty in acquiring land in chandigarh. her proposal was accepted by the chandigarh administration and the film city is proposed to be set up in sarangpur, chandigarh. this has been considered as a source of employment in the future.
