chandrapur
Important places[edit]
important places[edit]
chandrapur fort
the chandrapur fort (earlier known as chanda fort) (today called "old city") is a fort located at confluence of erai and zarpat rivers. the fort was built by gond king, khandkya ballal sah. the fort has four gates: jatpura gate to the north, anchaleshwar gate to the east, pathanpura gate to the south and binba gate to the west. the fort also has five small gates, called khidkis (windows): bagad khidki to the northeast, hanuman khidki to the southeast, vithhal khidki to the southwest and chor khidki to the northwest and masan kidki. the fort has strong walls 15–20 feet high.
gates and windows of chandrapur fort    jatpura gate of chandrapur fort       anchaleshwar gate of chandrapur fort       pathanpura gate of chandrapur fort
mahakali mandir
mahakali mandir
mahakali mandir (temple) is an often frequented temple in chandrapur. the ancient temple was built by dhundya ram sah, of gond dynasty around the 16th century. tuesdays are a particularly significant day to visit. within the mandir there is a small ganesh temple and a hanuman temple. at the two temple entrances, there are small shops for puja (worship) supplies such as coconut, flowers and cloth. items for home décor and puja décor are sold near the temple. near the rear entrance there is a shani temple.
within the temple are two murtis (idols). one associated with shiv ling is a standing idol decorated with red, yellow and orange cloths. the other is in a reclining position below the ground level, and devotees must walk in a tunnel to reach it. inside the temple, a priest is present to assist visitors with puja and offerings. a trust administers the temple. dharmashalas provide accommodation for pilgrims. the annual yatra (fair) takes place in april, entertaining the followers of mahakali and the citizens of chandrapur.
anchaleshwar mandir
anchaleshwar mandir
the anchaleshwar mandir celebrates a form of the lord siva. it is situated adjoining anchaleshwar gate of chandrapur fort on the banks of the zarpat river. the official samadhi (mausoleum) of the gond kings is located within the temple complex.
tadoba andhari tiger reserve
tiger at tadoba andhari tiger reserve
the tadoba andhari tiger reserve is located approximately 30 km north of chandrapur near the erai dam. this park was included in the project tiger since 1973. the total area of the reserve is 625.40 km. in 2014 the tiger population in tadoba was 66, that number has gone up to 86. tadoba is now a home to 86 tigers despite years of lynching, poaching & other threats. there are many hotels and resorts near moharli gate, zari gate and navegaon gate of the reserve, available for the tourists. the guided tours inside the park are available during early morning and evening time only.
