chandigarh
Postcolonial significance[edit]
postcolonial significance[edit]
this section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic. please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style. (july 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
le corbusier centre, chandigarh
background[edit]
nehru said of chandigarh when he first visited the site of the new city in 1952: "let this be a new town, symbolic of the freedom of india, unfettered by the traditions of the past, an expression of the nation's faith in the future". for nehru, chandigarh represented a vision of how a new planned city could be a canvas for the regeneration of the nation itself after centuries of oppression under british colonial rule and the dilution of indian character from the nation's towns. guided by the architectural optics of le corbusier, the development of chandigarh was part of a state-driven exercise to break from the traditions of imperialism in city making and begin the process of healing from the injustices suffered.
to the extent that chandigarh epitomises the destructive influence of the british, in the impetus of its creation as a solution to the otherwise violent partitioning of territory between india and pakistan, it represents an early ideological symbol for the birth of india's future. the selection of the physical site involved an extensive vetting process. many existing towns in punjab were surveyed as options for the new capital and dismissed for poor performance concerning factors such as military defensibility and capacity for accommodating potential refugee influxes. the construction of a new town in chandigarh was determined to be the best option due to its relative strength in these factors as well as its proximity to the national capital, new delhi, its central location within the state of punjab, its abundance of fecund land and its beautiful natural landscape.
architecture museum in sector 10, chandigarh chronicles the architectural development of chandigarh
modernism in new town design[edit]
off the back of this conflation of assets chandigarh then was well poised to serve a function as a city-building project in national identity. from a federal policy perspective, the development of the new town became a tool in india for modernisation and an intended driver of economic activity, legal reform, and regional growth as well as a significant agent for the decolonisation project. as britain's grip on their empire began to weaken their accelerated withdrawal between the beginning of the second world war and 1947 left their former colony in states of disarray and disorganisation, and policymakers for the new indian government were required to contend with issues such as rapid rural depopulation, urban congestion, and poverty. as well as in chandigarh this policy tool was implemented in the creation of new capital cities in bhubaneswar and gandhinagar, and more broadly throughout india in the 112 planned cities created between independence and 1971, purposed to absorb migration from those regions in demise after being abandoned by the british and provide hubs for growing industries such as in steel and energy.
these examples from a genealogy of utopian urban forms developed in post-independence india as a panacea for issues related to underdevelopment as well as post-independence complications to do with separatist religious conflict and the resulting diplomatic tensions. chandigarh is the first example of a state-funded master-planned modernisation scheme. these "urban utopias" attempt to enforce nation-building policies through a federalised rule of law at a regional level, and diffuse postcolonial urbanism which codes justice in its design. the intent is that the economic success and progressivism of cities such as chandigarh as a lightning rod for social change would gradually be emulated at the scale of the nation. chandigarh was for nehru and le corbusier an embodiment of the egalitarian potential offered by modernism, where the machine age would complete the liberation of the nation's citizens through the productive capacity of industrial technology and the relative ease of constructing civic facilities such as dams, hospitals, and schools; the very antithesis of the conservative and traditional legacy of colonialism. though built as a state capital chandigarh came to be focused on industry and higher education. the specialisation of these new towns in particular functions represents a crucial aspect of the modernisation process as a decolonising enterprise, in completing a national portfolio where each town forms a part of the utopian model for contemporary india.
the post-colonialism of chandigarh is rooted in the transformation of the political ideas of those such as nehru who generated a new indian nationalism through the design of newly built forms. scholars such as edward said have emphasised the sinister nature of nostalgia and the romanticisation of colonial architecture in newly independent colonies as artefacts that perpetuate the ideological legacy of the hegemony and replicate the hierarchy of power even after decolonisation. insofar as modernism in architecture (which defined town planning under the nehru era of rule) represents an active radical break from tradition and a colonial past even the very presence of le corbusier has been recognised as an indelible resistance to the british construction legacy, as he provided the first non-british influence on design thinking in india, enabling a generational shift in the contemporary cohort of architects and planners to be hired by the state throughout the rest of the century who were initiated under modernist conditioning.
as early as the 1950s the presence of the international style could be detected in the design of houses in india, "whether mistri or architect-designed". the development of low-cost housing was a priority for chandigarh, and the modern forms designed by corbusier are characterised by a dispensing with colonial forms focused on classic aesthetics and a refocusing on strategies such as using narrow frontages and orientation for minimising direct exposure to the sun and maximising natural ventilation and efficient cost while providing modern amenities in the international style aesthetic. these developments are credited as the beginning of a "chandigarh architecture", inspiring gradual experimentation with form and an "indianising" of the international style which precipitated the formation of the country's new cultural identity in town design.
criticisms[edit]
criticisms are well established regarding the implementation of the postcolonial vision of nehru and le corbusier, and the critical emphasis on its influence. claims have been made that the focus on corbusier's architect-centred discourse erases the plural authorship of the narrative of chandigarh's development, arguing that it was, in fact, hybridity of values and of "contested modernities" of western and indigenous indian origin and cultural exchanges rather than an uncontested administrative enterprise. such criticism is consistent with claims that decolonisation in india has marked a shift from segregation based on race to segregation based on class, and that planned cities are truly "designed" ones which represent the values and interests of a westernised middle-class indian elite which ignore the complexities of india's diverse ethnic and cultural landscape and enabled neocolonial hierarchies such as the imposition of the hindi language on non-conforming castes. brent c. brolin argues that le corbusier ignored indian preferences in designing the housing and communities and that the residents have done what they can to recreate their accustomed lifestyle. furthermore, the early over-saturation of the minimalist international style in building design in chandigarh has attracted criticisms of effecting a "democratic, self-effacing banality", though this criticism is perhaps negligent of how this was necessary for galvanising higher standards of urban living throughout the country.
