chennai
Media
media

main articles: media in chennai and list of newspapers in chennai

see also: list of tamil-language television channels and broadcasting in chennai
newspaper publishing started in chennai with the launch of a weekly, the madras courier, in 1785. it was followed by the weeklies the madras gazette and the government gazette in 1795. the spectator, founded in 1836, was the first english newspaper in chennai to be owned by an indian and became the city's first daily newspaper in 1853. the first tamil newspaper, swadesamitran, was launched in 1899. first telugu journal printed from madras was satya doota in 1835 and andhra patrika found in 1908 was the most successful telugu newspaper from madras.
headquarters of sun network, india's largest private tv broadcaster
the major english dailies published in chennai are the hindu, the new indian express, the deccan chronicle and the times of india and many more. the evening dailies are, the trinity mirror and news today. as of 2004, the hindu was the city's most read english newspaper, with a daily circulation of 267,349. the major business dailies published from the city are the economic times, the hindu business line, business standard, mint and the financial express. the major tamil dailies include the dina thanthi, dinakaran, dina mani, dina malar, the hindu tamil, tamil murasu, makkal kural and malai malar. malayala manorama and mathrubhumi are the major malayalam dailies while major telugu dailies include eenadu, vaartha, andhra jyothi and sakshi. the one and only hindi newspaper published from chennai is the rajasthan patrika. the local weekly newspapers circulated to residents are t. nagar times, pillar times, arcot road talk, chrompet times. chennai's first corporate leisure newspaper, the shopping express. magazines published from chennai include ananda vikatan, kumudam, kalki, kungumam, puthiya thalaimurai, thuglak, frontline and sportstar
doordarshan runs two terrestrial television channels and two satellite television channels from its chennai centre, which was set up in 1974. private tamil satellite television networks such as sun tv, raj tv, zee tamizh, star vijay, jaya tv, makkal tv, vasanth tv, kalaignar tv, captain tv and puthiyathalaimurai tv broadcast out of chennai. the sun network one of india's largest broadcasting companies is based in the city. while the cable tv service is entirely controlled by the state government, direct–to–home (dth) is available via dd direct plus, dish tv, tata sky, videocon dth, sun direct dth, reliance big tv and digital tv. chennai is the first city in india to have implemented the conditional access system for cable television. radio broadcasting began in 1924 by the madras presidency radio club. the radio station at the rippon buildings complex was founded in 1930 and was then shifted to all india radio in 1938. the city has four am and 11 fm radio stations operated by all india radio, anna university and suryan fm, radio mirchi, big fm, hello fm, radio city, radio one among others.
