chennai
Arts and culture
arts and culture

main article: culture of chennai

see also: tamil culture
museums and art galleries
national art gallery (chennai)
chennai is home to many museums, galleries, and other institutions, many of which are free of admission charges and are major tourist attractions as well as playing a research role. the city also has one of the oldest museums and art galleries in the country – government museum, chennai and the national art gallery (chennai), established in the early 18th century.
the city also hosts two art festivals annually. the "fort museum" inside the premises of fort st. george is an important museum having a noteworthy collection of objects of the british era in its collection. the museum is managed by the archaeological survey of india and has in its possession, the first flag of india hoisted at fort st george after the declaration of india's independence on 15 august 1947.
music and performing arts
mgr memorial at marina beach, chennai
chennai is a major centre for music, art and culture in india. the city is known for its classical dance shows. in 1930, for the first time in india, madras university introduced a course of music, as part of the bachelor of arts curriculum. the madras music season, initiated by madras music academy in 1927, is celebrated every year during the month of december. it features performances of traditional carnatic music by many artists in and around the city. the main folk music in chennai is gaana, a combination of various folk musics sung mainly sung in the working-class area of north chennai.
an arts festival called the chennai sangamam, which showcases not only various art of tamil nadu, but also from the neighbouring states, like kalari (from kerala), which is a major attraction, is held in january every year. the speciality of chennai sangamam is that the various programmes are held near or at the various famous landmarks in the city so that everyone in the city has access to the programmes and there is no fee charged for entry for any of the programmes. pookolam, a form of art that uses coloured flour to create patterns and designs, comes from kerala, but can be seen in abundance at the time of onam.
the city has a diverse theatre scene and is one of the important centres for bharata natyam, a classical dance form that originated in tamil nadu and is the oldest dance of india. an important cultural centre for bharata natyam is kalakshetra, on the beach in the south of the city. in 2012, a group of five bharatha natyam dancers from chennai performed at the india campaign during the 2012 summer olympics. chennai has been featured in unesco creative cities network (uccn) list since october 2017 for its century-old musical tradition. chennai is also home to some choirs, who during the christmas season stage various carol performances across the city in tamil and english.
