chennai
Sports and recreation
sports and recreation

main article: sport in chennai
jawaharlal nehru stadium multipurpose stadium
cricket is the most popular sport in chennai. it was introduced in 1864 with the foundation of the madras cricket club. the m.a. chidambaram stadium established in 1916 is among the oldest cricket stadiums in india. the stadium was also one of the venues of the 1987,1996 and 2011 icc cricket world cups. chemplast cricket ground located at the iit madras campus is another important venue for cricket matches. prominent cricketers from the city include former cricket captains s. venkataraghavan and kris srikkanth. a cricket fast bowling academy called the mrf pace foundation, whose coaches include t. a. sekhar and glenn mcgrath, is based in chennai. being home to the indian premier league (ipl) cricket team chennai super kings, the city hosted the finals of the ipl's 2011 and 2012 series.
m. a. chidambaram stadium, one of the premier cricket venues in india
the city's professional football club chennaiyin fc competes in indian super league, the country's top tier association football league associated with asian football federation and recognized by fifa. the club uses the jawaharlal nehru stadium nicknamed the marina arena as their home ground and are champions of the indian super league in 2015 and 2018.
chennai was the venue of the 1995 south asian games. chennai is home to a world series hockey (wsh) team, the chennai cheetahs. the mayor radhakrishnan stadium is associated with hockey and was venue for the international hockey tournament the 2005 men's champions trophy and the 2007 men's asia cup. the jawaharlal nehru stadium is associated for hosting football and athletic competitions, it also houses a multi–purpose indoor complex for competition in volleyball, basketball and table tennis. water sports are played in the velachery aquatic complex. tennis sport is popularising among the city youths, since 1997 chennai has been host to the only atp world tour event held in india, the chennai open which has been shifted to pune as maharashtra open from 2017. vijay amritraj, mahesh bhupathi ramesh krishnan and somdev devvarman are tennis players from chennai. chennai is home to chennai slam, two-time national champion of india's top professional basketball division, the uba pro basketball league.
chennai open match at the sdat tennis stadium
madras boat club (founded in 1846) and the royal madras yacht club (founded by sir francis spring in 1911) promote the sailing sports in chennai, and organise national and international sailing events. automobile racing in india has been closely connected with chennai since its beginnings shortly after independence. motor racing events are held on a special purpose track in madras motor race track, sriperumbudur, which has also been the venue for several international competitions. formula one driver karun chandhok was born in chennai.
horse racing is held at the guindy race course, while rowing competitions are hosted at the madras boat club. the city has two 18-hole golf courses, the cosmopolitan club and the gymkhana club, both established in the late nineteenth century. the city has a rugby union team called the chennai cheetahs.
madras motor race track circuit, in irungattukottai
home to the country's first international chess master, the first grandmaster, the first female grandmaster, the first international arbiter, and 12 of the 34 world chess grandmasters from india, chennai is often dubbed "india's chess capital". former world chess champion viswanathan anand grew up and resides in chennai. other sports persons of repute from chennai include table tennis players sharath kamal and two–time world carrom champion, maria irudayam. chennai was the host of the world chess championship 2013 match between viswanathan anand and magnus carlsen. in 2022, chennai hosted the 44th chess olympiad, in which 1,400 players from across 187 countries will participate.
city based teams

for a more comprehensive list, see sport in chennai § teams.
club sport league home stadium founded   chennai slam  basketball  uba pro basketball league  jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium  2015   chennai superstarz  badminton  premier badminton league  jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium  2015   chennai super kings  cricket  indian premier league  m.a. chidambaram stadium  2008   chepauk super gillies  cricket  tamil nadu premier league  m.a. chidambaram stadium  2016   chennaiyin fc  football  indian super league  marina arena  2013   tamil thalaivas  kabaddi  pro kabaddi league  jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium  2017   chennai lions  table tennis  ultimate table tennis  jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium  2019   chennai spartans  volleyball  pro volleyball league  jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium  2019
