chennai
Administration
administration

main article: administration of chennai
divisions of chennai district.
the ripon building, commissioned in 1913, houses the greater chennai corporation
chennai city is governed by the greater chennai corporation (formerly "corporation of madras"), which was established in 1688. it is the oldest surviving municipal corporation in india and the second oldest surviving corporation in the world. in 2011, the jurisdiction of the chennai corporation was expanded from 174 km (67 sq mi) to an area of 426 km (164 sq mi), dividing into three regions—north, south and central, which covers 200 wards. the corporation is headed by a mayor, an office presently occupied by saidai sa. duraisamy. the mayor and councillors of the city are elected through a popular vote by the residents. while the city limit was expanded in 2011, the revised population is yet to be officially announced.
the chennai metropolitan development authority (cmda) is the nodal agency responsible for planning and development of chennai metropolitan area, which is spread over an area of 1,189 km (459 sq mi), covering the chennai district and parts of tiruvallur, kanchipuram and chengalpattu districts. the larger suburbs are governed by town municipalities and the smaller ones are governed by town councils called panchayats. under the gamut of the cmda are 5 parliamentary and 28 assembly constituencies. the cmda has drafted an additional master plan that aims to develop satellite townships around the city. the city's contiguous satellite towns include mahabalipuram in the south, chengalpattu and maraimalai nagar in the southwest, and sriperumpudur, arakkonam, kanchipuram and tiruvallur to the west.
chennai, as the capital of the state of tamil nadu, houses the state executive and legislative headquarters primarily in the secretariat buildings in the fort st george campus. the madras high court, is the highest judicial authority in the state, whose jurisdiction extends across tamil nadu and puducherry. chennai has three parliamentary constituencies—chennai north, chennai central and chennai south—and elects 24 members of the legislative assembly (mlas) to the state legislature.
law and order
madras high court
the greater chennai police is the main law enforcement agency in the city, with a jurisdiction of over 745 km (288 sq mi) catering to over 8.5 million people. it consists of 121 police stations and is headed by a commissioner of police. the greater chennai police is a division of the tamil nadu police, and the administrative control lies with the tamil nadu home ministry. chennai city traffic police (cctp) is responsible for the traffic management in the city. the metropolitan suburbs are policed by the chennai metropolitan police, headed by the chennai police commissionerate, and the outer district areas of the cmda are policed by the kanchipuram and thiruvallur police departments.
a police patrol car
as of 2011 (prior to the expansion of chennai corporation area), chennai city has a sanctioned strength of 14,000 police personnel. with a population density of 26,903 persons per square kilometre, the city had 1 policeman for every 413 people. the chennai suburban police had about 4,093 police personnel and a ratio of 1:1,222. in 2010, the crime rate in the city was 169.2 per 100,000 people, as against an average of 341.9 in the 35 major cities of india. in 2011, north chennai zone had 30 police stations and 3 police out posts, central chennai zone had 28 police stations and 3 police out posts, and south chennai zone had 30 police stations.
in 2009, madras central prison, one of the oldest prisons in india, built over 11 acres (4 ha) of land, was demolished; the prisoners were moved to puzhal central prison.
politics
since the 19th century, when western scholars proposed that dravidian languages, which dominated the southern region of india, formed a different linguistic group to that of the indo-aryan languages that are predominant in the north of the subcontinent, the aspects of tamil nationalism gained prominence. this resulted in the anti-hindi agitations in the city and across the state. however, the post-independence re-organisation of indian states according to linguistic and ethnic basis has moderated tamil nationalism, especially the demand for separation from the indian union. the anti-hindi agitations in mid-1960s made the dmk more popular and more powerful political force in the state. the agitations of the 1960s played a crucial role in the defeat of the tamil nadu congress party in the 1967 elections and the continuing dominance of dravidian parties in tamil nadu politics.
tamil nadu legislative assembly
being the capital of the madras province that covered a vast area of the deccan region, chennai remained the centre of politics in the southern region of india during the british colonial era. after independence, it remained the centre of political activities of the state of tamil nadu. chennai is the birthplace of the idea of the indian national congress, commonly known as the congress party. founded by indian and british members of the theosophical society movement, most notably a.o. hume, the idea was originally conceived in a private meeting of 17 men after a theosophical convention held in the city in december 1884. during the first 50 years of the indian national congress, the city played host to its conferences seven times in 1887, 1894, 1898, 1903, 1908, 1914 and 1927, becoming one of the strong bases for the indian independence movement. after independence, the city hosted the congress in 1955 in its suburb of avadi.
chennai is also the birthplace of several regional political movements since the british era. south indian welfare association, one of the earliest regional parties, was founded in 1916, which later came to be known as the justice party, which was the main opposition party to the indian national congress in the state. in 1944, the party was renamed dravidar kazhagam (dk) by e. v. ramasami (popularly known as 'periyar'). the party was a non-political party that demanded the establishment of an independent state called dravida nadu. however, due to the differences between its two leaders periyar and c. n. annadurai, the party was split. annadurai left the party to form the dravida munnetra kazhagam (dmk). the dmk decided to enter into politics in 1956.
utility services

see also: water management in chennai
the city's water supply and sewage treatment are managed by the chennai metrowater supply and sewage board. water is drawn from red hills lake and chembarambakkam lake, the primary water reservoirs of the city, and treated at water treatment plants located at kilpauk, puzhal, chembarambakkam and supplied to the city through 27 water distribution stations. the city receives 530 million liters per day (mld) of water from krishna river through telugu ganga project, 180 mld of water from the veeranam lake project and 100 mld of water from the minjur desalination plant, the country's largest sea water desalination plant. however, chennai is predicted to face a huge deficit of 713 mld in 2026 as the demand is projected at 2,248 mld and supply estimated at only 1,535 mld. the city's sewer system was designed in 1910, with some modifications in 1958. there are 714 public toilets in the city managed by the city corporation, and 2,000 more have been planned by the corporation. the corporation also owns 52 community halls across the city.
the corporation of chennai provides civic services to the city. garbage collection in some of the wards is contracted to ramky enviro engineers limited, a private company, while the corporation looks after the removal and processing of solid waste in the others, with a superintendent engineer managing the channels. as of 2011, eight transfer stations exist within the city for treating the waste. garbage is dumped in two dump-yards in the city—one in kodungaiyur and another in pallikaranai, with a major portion of the latter covering the pallikaranai marshland. in market areas, the conservancy work is done during the night. electricity is distributed by the tamil nadu electricity board. fire services are handled by the tamil nadu fire and rescue services. the city, along with the suburbs, has 33 operating fire stations.
the chennai city region has 568 post offices, of which nearly 460 operate from rented premises.
