chennai
Economy
economy

main article: economy of chennai
corporate headquarters of the $10 billion murugappa group in chennai
india land tech park, ambattur
infosys at mahindra world city, chennai
ashok leyland corporate headquarters in guindy, chennai.
tata consultancy services, chennai
cognizant's delivery center in chennai
recent estimates of the economy of the entire chennai metropolitan area range from $78.6 to $86 billion (ppp gdp), ranking it from fourth- to sixth-most productive metro area of india. chennai has a broad industrial base in the automobile, computer, technology, hardware manufacturing and healthcare sectors. as of 2012, the city is india's second-largest exporter of information technology (it) and business process outsourcing (bpo) services. a major part of india's automobile industry is located in and around the city thus earning it the nickname "detroit of india". known as the "gateway of south india", chennai is the third-most visited city in india by international tourists according to euromonitor. the city is also called the cultural capital of south india. the city was home to the madras stock exchange, india's fourth stock exchange, one of four permanently recognised by sebi, and india's third-largest by trading volume, ranked behind the bombay stock exchange and the national stock exchange of india.
industrialisation in the city dates back to the 16th century, when textile mills manufactured goods which were exported to british during its war with france. according to forbes magazine, chennai is one of the fastest-growing cities in the world and is ranked among the "forbes-top 10 fastest growing cities in the world". it is ranked 4th in hosting the maximum number of fortune 500 companies of india, next only to mumbai, delhi and kolkata. it also is home to 24 indian companies having a net worth of more than us$1 billion. as of 2012, the city has about 34,260 identified companies in its 15 zones, of which 5,196 companies have a paid-up the capital of over ₹ 50 lakh.
zoho headquarters in chennai
chennai has a diversified economic base anchored by the automobile, software services, hardware manufacturing, health care and financial services industries. according to the confederation of indian industry, chennai is estimated to grow to a us$100 billion economy, 2.5 times its present size, by 2025. as of 2012, with ₹ 1 lakh crore investment in the pipeline over 5 years, the city is poised for major industrial investment. chennai is classified as a global city by gawc, with a ranking of beta based on the extent of global reach and financial influence. it is estimated that about 400 financial industry businesses are headquartered in the city, half of which are located in the areas of mylapore, r. a. puram, nungambakkam and t. nagar.
the city is base to around 40 percent of india's automobile industry and 45 percent of auto components industry. a large number of automotive companies including royal enfield, hyundai, renault, robert bosch, nissan motors, ashok leyland, yamaha motor, daimler ag, caterpillar inc., komatsu limited, bharatbenz, ford, bmw, citroën and mitsubishi have manufacturing plants in chennai. the heavy vehicles factory at avadi produces military vehicles, including india's main battle tank: arjun mbt. the integral coach factory manufactures railway coaches and other rolling stock for indian railways. the ambattur–padi industrial zone houses many textile manufacturers, and a special economic zone (sez) for apparel and footwear manufacturing has been set up in the southern suburbs of the city. chennai contributes more than 50 percent of india's leather exports.
many software and software services companies have development centres in chennai, which contributed 14 percent of india's total software exports of ₹ 14,42,140 lakh during 2006–07, making it the second largest indian city software exporter following bangalore. the tidel park in chennai was billed as asia's largest it park when it was built. major software companies have their offices set up here, with some of them making chennai their largest base.
tidel park
prominent financial institutions, including the world bank, standard chartered bank, abn amro, bank of america, the royal bank of scotland, goldman sachs, barclays, hsbc, ing group, allianz, sumitomo mitsui banking corporation, the bank of tokyo-mitsubishi ufj, abu dhabi commercial bank, asian development bank, credit suisse, bnp paribas fortis, irevna, deutsche bank and citibank have back office and development centre operations in the city. chennai is home to the national level commercial banks indian bank and indian overseas bank and many state level co–operative banks, finance and insurance companies. telecom and electronics manufacturers based in and around chennai include samsung, nokia siemens, motorola, lenovo, dell, force10, wipro, flextronics and siemens among others. chennai is currently the largest electronics hardware exporter in india, accounting for 45% of the total exports in 2010–11. telecom giants ericsson and alcatel-lucent, pharmaceuticals giant pfizer and chemicals giant dow chemicals have research and development facilities in chennai. the ticel bio–tech park at taramani and golden jubilee bio–tech park at siruseri houses biotechnology companies and laboratories. chennai has a stock exchange called the madras stock exchange. the world trade center complex is located at perungudi on the southern side of the city. according to jones lang lasalle, demand for investment-grade buildings in chennai is high from it companies. the average annual gross demand in chennai is 4.5 million square feet.
world trade center towers
a study conducted by the national housing bank on the residential price index of indian cities showed that chennai experienced the highest growth after the financial crisis of 2007–2008. medical tourism is an important part of chennai's economy with 45 percent of total medical tourists to india making to chennai. the tamil film industry and the tamil television industry are also significant parts of chennai's economy. the city also has a permanent exhibition complex in nandambakkam called the chennai trade centre. it hosted the tamil nadu global investors meet in 2019 which was a business summit organised by the government of tamil nadu. with 385 ultra-rich living in the city as of 2013, chennai is positioned in the sixth place among indian cities that are home to the country's super-rich. the city is the third largest market in india for luxury cars.
banking and finance
world bank office in chennai
the reserve bank of india ranked chennai as third-largest deposit centre and third-largest credit centre nationwide as of june 2012. prior to the advent of modern commercial banks, the banking services in the city were offered to the public by nattukottai chettiars or nagarathars, chiefly in and around the neighbourhood of george town, who offered loans as well as accepted money deposits from the public, in addition to offering loans to the agricultural labourers. even today, many of the banking offices are housed in heritage structures belonging to the colonial era that are chiefly clustered around rajaji road in george town. chennai is home to the first european-style banking system in india with the establishment of the 'madras bank' on 21 june 1683, almost a century before the establishment of the first commercial banks, such as the bank of hindustan and the general bank of india, which were established in 1770 and 1786, respectively. upon the recommendation of the british finance committee on the formation of a government bank, the madras bank, then known as the 'government bank', started functioning again from 1806. in 1843, the bank merged with the carnatic bank (1788), the british bank of madras (1795) and the asiatic bank (1804) and became the bank of madras, which was one of the three presidency banks of india, the other two being the bank of bengal and the bank of bombay. in 1921, the three presidency banks merged to form the imperial bank of india, which later became the state bank of india in 1955.
chennai is the headquarters of the indian bank, the indian overseas bank and the erstwhile bharat overseas bank, which merged with the indian overseas bank in 2007. the city is home to the south zonal office of the reserve bank of india, the country's central bank, along with its zonal training centre and reserve bank staff college, one of the two colleges of the bank. the city also houses the permanent back office of the world bank, which is one of the largest buildings owned by the bank outside its headquarters in washington, dc. the chennai office handles corporate financial, accounting, administrative and it services of the bank, in addition to several value-added operations of the bank that were earlier handled only in its washington, dc office, including the bank's analytical work in bond valuation which is estimated to be us$100 billion. several foreign banks have established their branches in the city. the first sri lankan bank in india was established when the bank of ceylon opened its branch in madras on 31 october 1995.
