chennai
Etymology
etymology

see also: names of chennai in different languages
the name chennai is of telugu language origin. it was derived from the name of a telugu ruler, damarla mudirasa chennappa nayakudu, father of damarla venkatapathy nayak, a nayak ruler who served as a general under venkata iii of the vijayanagara empire from whom the british acquired the town in 1639. the first official use of the name chennai is said to be in a sale deed, dated august 1639, to francis day of the east india company, even before the chennakesava perumal temple was built in 1646, while some scholars argue to the contrary.
the name madras is also of native origin, and has been shown to have been in use before the british established a presence in india. a vijayanagara-era inscription dated to the year 1367 that mentions the port of mādarasanpattanam, along with other small ports on the east coast, was discovered in 2015 and it was theorised that the aforementioned port is the fishing port of royapuram. according to some sources, madras is derived from madraspattinam, a fishing village north of fort st george. however, it is uncertain whether the name was in use before the arrival of europeans. british military mapmakers believed madras was originally mundir-raj or mundiraj, which was the name of a telugu community, mudiraj, who were the native inhabitants of the city.
there are also suggestions that it may have originated from the portuguese phrase mãe de deus or madre de dios, which means "mother of god", due to portuguese influence on the port city, specifically referring to a church of st. mary.
in august 1996, the government of tamil nadu officially changed the name from madras to chennai. at that time many indian cities underwent a change of name. however, the name madras continues in occasional use for the city, as well as for places named after the city such as university of madras, iit madras, madras institute of technology, madras medical college, madras veterinary college, madras christian college.
