chennai
Tourism and hospitality
tourism and hospitality

main article: tourism in chennai
itc grand chola hotel, chennai, is the largest hotel in south india.
with temples, beaches and centres of historical and cultural significance, including the unesco heritage site of mahabalipuram, chennai is one of the most-visited cities in india. the city serves as the gateway to the southern part of india with tourists landing in the city and then visiting the rest of the region. chennai was the most-visited indian city by foreign tourists in 2009 and issued the third-highest number of visas on arrival in 2014. in 2011, chennai was ranked the 41st most visited city, with 3,174,500 tourists, a 14-percent increase from 2010. about 830,620 domestic tourists arrived in chennai in march 2011. chennai's leading tourist countries-of-origin are sri lanka, malaysia, singapore, the united kingdom, france and the united states. in 2015, the city received 4,243,700 foreign tourists, making it the third-most-visited city in india after delhi and mumbai and 43rd-most visited city in the world by foreign tourists. as of 2012, the city had 21 luxury hotels in the five-star category, with over 4,500 rooms in the inventory. the collective luxury room inventory across four- and five-star categories as of 2018 is around 7,000. about 85 percent of the room demand in chennai comes from business travellers.
entertainment
marina beach is a famous landmark in the city.
anna centenary library, one of the largest libraries in asia
chennai is the base for tamil cinema, sometimes nicknamed as kollywood, alluding to the neighbourhood of kodambakkam where a number of film studios are located. many film personalities have gone on to become politicians including c. n. annadurai, m. karunanidhi, m. g. ramachandran and jayalalithaa. chennai hosts major film studios, including avm productions, the oldest surviving studio in india. as of 2012, there are 120 cinema screens and multiplexes. major multiplexes include sathyam cinemas, escape cinemas, devi and mayajaal. chennai's expansive theatre network stages many tamil plays of many genres: political satire, slapstick comedy, history, mythology and drama. english plays are popular in the city, along with the more common tamil-language plays.
recreation

main article: parks in chennai
the zoo, beaches and wildlife parks form the primary recreation areas of the city. chennai has a 19+ km coastline with its corporation limits. the city boasts two popular beaches, the marina and the elliot's. the marina spans 13 km (8.1 mi) between the deltas of cooum and adyar, and is the second-longest urban beach in the world. elliot's beach lies south of the adyar delta. covelong beach lies along the coromandal coast. madras crocodile bank trust is a reptile zoo located 40 kilometres (25 mi) south of the city covering an area of 8.5 acres (3.4 ha) and had over 450,000 visitors in 2007. the center has one of the world's largest collections of reptiles and has bred 14 of the 23 existing species of crocodiles and alligators. the arignar anna zoological park, one of the largest zoological parks in the world, annually attracts nearly 2 million visitors. guindy national park, a protected area of tamil nadu, has a children's park and a snake park, which gained statutory recognition as a medium zoo from the central zoo authority of india in 1995. chennai is one of the few cities in the world to accommodate a national park, the guindy national park, within its limits. an estimated 4.5 percent of the city's area is under green cover. this enables birding. the seven zones of the old corporation limits have about 260 parks, many of which suffer poor maintenance. the city has a per capita park space of 0.41 sq m, which is the least among all metros in india. the eight zones in the newly added areas of the city have about 265 locations that have been identified for development of new parks. the largest park is the 358-acre tholkappia poonga, developed to restore the fragile ecosystem of the adyar estuary. the horticulture department-owned semmoli poonga is a 20-acre downtown botanical garden.
chennai houses several theme parks, namely mgm dizzee world and queen's land. however, several fatal accidents have occurred in the theme parks. wonderla plans to open an amusement park in 2017. other important recreation centres include madras boat club, which is over 140 years old, and gymkhana club, which is famous for its 18-hole golf courses. built in 1867, madras boat club is the second-oldest surviving indian rowing club.
shopping

see also: shopping in chennai
chennai is home to several malls, due to its status as an it hub. major ones include express avenue (ea), citi centre, abirami mega mall, spencer plaza, ampa skywalk, phoenix market city and forum vijaya mall. chennai is an important gold market in india contributing to 45 percent of the 800-tonne annual national gold uptake. the city is also the base to the world gold council's india operations. the city's retail industry is majorly concentrated in t. nagar which accounts for major share jewellery and clothes sold in chennai. according to the 2012 report by property consultant cushman & wakefield, main streets across the world, khader nawaz khan road at nungambakkam ranked 10th position in the list of 'top 10 global highest retail rental growth markets 2012', with 36.7 percent jump in rents.
