chennai
Architecture
architecture

main article: architecture of chennai

see also: list of tallest buildings in chennai and heritage structures in chennai
triumph of labour
with the history of many neighbourhoods of the city such as mylapore, triplicane, and tiruvanmiyur antedating that of the city itself, the architecture of chennai ranges in a wide chronology. the oldest buildings in the city date from the 7th and 8th centuries ce, which include the kapaleeshwarar temple in mylapore and the parthasarathy temple in triplicane, built in the dravidian architecture. this architecture includes various styles, such as those of the pallavas, the cholas, and the vijayanagara empires. the associated agraharam architecture, which consists of traditional row houses surrounding a temple, can still be seen in these areas. the heritage temples at mamallapuram at the outskirts of the city are some of the examples of the pallava architecture. chennai ranks second to kolkata in having the largest collection of indian heritage buildings in the country.
parry's corner, one of the oldest business areas of chennai, lined up with art deco buildings.
with the advent of the mugals and the british, the city saw a rise in a blend of hindu, islamic and gothic revival styles, resulting in the distinct indo-saracenic architecture. the architecture for several early institutions such as banking and commerce, railways, press and education, chiefly through the colonial rule, followed the earlier directions of the neo-classical and the indo-saracenic. the chepauk palace in the city, designed by paul benfield, is said to be the first indo-saracenic building in india. since then, many of the colonial-era buildings in the city were designed in this style of architecture, which is most apparent around the fort st. george built in 1640. most of these were designed by english architects robert fellowes chisholm and henry irwin. the best examples of this style include the madras high court (built in 1892), southern railway headquarters, ripon building, government museum, senate house of the university of madras, amir mahal, bharat insurance building, victoria public hall and the college of engineering. the triumph of labour, also known as the labour statue, at the marina beach is an important landmark of chennai.
southern railway headquarters, one of the fine examples of indo-saracenic architecture in the city
the construction of the national art gallery in madras was completed in 1909. the new building, with a distinct façade, was built of pink sandstone brought from sathyavedu, and formed part of the madras museum campus. it was opened, on 23 january 1909, by the governor of fort st. george, sir arthur lawley, and called the victoria memorial hall after the queen-empress victoria. the residential architecture in the city was based on the bungalow or the continuous row house prototypes. gothic revival style buildings include the chennai central and chennai egmore railway stations. the santhome church, which was originally built by the portuguese in 1523 and is believed to house the remains of the apostle st. thomas, was rebuilt in 1893 in neo-gothic style.
by the early 20th century, the art deco too made its entry upon the city's urban landscape. from the 1930s onwards, many buildings in george town were built in this style, including the united india building (presently housing the life insurance corporation of india (lic)) and the burma shell building (presently the chennai house), both built in the 1930s, and the dare house, built in 1940. other examples include the bombay mutual building (presently housing lic) and the south indian chamber of commerce building. after independence, the city witnessed a rise in the modernism style of architecture. the completion of the lic building in 1959, the tallest building in the country at that time, marked the transition from lime-and-brick construction to concrete columns in the region. the presence of the weather radar at the chennai port, however, prohibited the construction of buildings taller than 60 m around a radius of 10 km for several decades that followed. in addition, the floor-area ratio (far) in the central business district is also 1.5, much less than that of smaller cities of the country. this resulted in the city expanding horizontally, unlike other metropolitan cities where vertical growth was prominent. on the contrary, the peripheral regions, especially on the southern and south-western sides, began experiencing vertical growth with the construction of buildings up to 60 floors. within the downtown area, the 48-storied highliving district tower h remains the tallest building at 161 metres.
