chinsurah
History[edit]
history[edit]
a view of chinsura the dutch settlement in bengal
the portuguese founded the town of hooghly-chuchura in 1579, but the district has thousands of years of heritage in the form of the great kingdom of bhurshut. the city flourished as a trading port and some religious structures were built. one such structure is a christian church dedicated to a statue of mary, brought by the portuguese.
in 1629, political disorder struck the city and the mughal governor of bengal expelled the portuguese. the fleeing portuguese lost the statue in the river, but local people later found it on the river bank. the arrested portuguese were taken to delhi, where a death sentence of trampling by elephants was decreed. when the emperor shah jahan heard this he ordered the priests released and granted a piece of land on the bank of the river hooghly, where the statue of mary was reestablished. there the portuguese constructed a church to house the statue, which still receives pilgrims today. the church was renovated in the 1980s and has been declared as a basilica by the authority of rome.
after the portuguese expulsion, the town was made the royal port of bengal, and all the public offices and records were established there. in 1640 the east india company established a factory at hugli, their first settlement in lower bengal.
in 1656 the dutch also erected a factory on the site of the town. at that time calcutta was the principal settlement in dutch bengal, who used it as a base for dutch intra-asian trade in opium, saltpetre, spices, cotton and indigo. however, in 1685, a dispute having taken place between the english factors and the nawab, the town was bombarded and burned to the ground.
in 1759 the dutch garrison of chinsura, on its march to chandernagore, attacked a british force under colonel forde. the battle of chinsurah lasted less than half an hour and ended with the rout of the dutch attackers. in 1795, during the napoleonic wars, a british garrison occupied the settlement. the peace of 1814 restored hughli to the dutch. however, in 1825, the dutch ceded many of their possessions in india to the british, in exchange for the british-occupied possessions in sumatra.
both chinsurah and hooghly played a role in the bengal renaissance and the indian independence movement. "vande mataram", india's national song, was composed by bankim chandra chattopadhyay at joraghat in chinsurah, who had been an alumnus of the hooghly collegiate school. nazrul islam's revolutionary songs were penned while he was imprisoned by the colonial government in hooghly jail (hooghly district correctional home).
