chittoor-andhra-pradesh
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
roadways
aps rtc bus on chittoor roads
the city is well connected to major cities through national and state highways. the national highways through chittoor city are, national highway 40 (india) connecting chittoor with kadapa and kurnool on north and connecting vellore and chennai on south national highway 69 (india) connecting chittoor with kolar and bangalore on west national highway 140 (india) connecting chittoor with tirupati and nellore on east. the city has total road length of 382.30 km.
public transport
the andhra pradesh state road transport corporation operates bus services from chittoor bus station. bus services are operated to kanipakam, tirupati, madanapalle, punganur, palamaner, piler, puttur, kuppam, srikalahasti, nellore, vellore, tiruvannamalai, salem, kanchipuram, chennai, puducherry, kolar, bangalore, mysore, kurnool, kadapa, anantapur, hyderabad, hanumakonda, warangal, visakhapatnam, rajamahendravaram, kakinada, vijayawada, guntur, tenali, ongole amaravati and also to all other major towns and cities in the chittoor district, andhra pradesh, tamilnadu, karnataka, puducherry and telangana states.
railways chittoor railway station is a national railway station in chittoor city of andhra pradesh. it lies on gudur–katpadi branch line section and is administered under guntakal railway division of south central railway zone. nearest major railway junction is katpadi junction railway station tamil nadu. just 30 km south from chittoor city. there are direct trains daily from chittoor to vijayawada, kakinada, rajamahendravaram, guntur, tenali, visakhapatnam, kacheguda (hyderabad), bengaluru, mysuru, thiruvananthapuram, new delhi to kanyakumari himsagar express and weekly/biweekly/triweekly trains connect chittoor with mannargudi, jammu, katra, tirunelveli, mangalore, ernakulam, visakhapatnam, rajamahendravaram, hatia ranchi, santragachi (kolkata) and jayanthi janata express, etc. which run through chittoor.
airports
the nearest airports are:
1) tirupati airport at renigunta in tirupati, andhra pradesh, is about 80 kms north. iata:tir is at par with other major cities, but flights are operated in a limited fashion.
2) chennai international airport. iata:maa at chennai is about 150 kms east
3) kempegowda international airport. iata:blr at bangalore is about 185 kms west
the infrastructure corporation of andhra pradesh limited (incap) will build kuppam airport at shantipuram mandal at an estimated cost of rs 100 crore .
