coimbatore
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]

main article: culture of coimbatore
coimbatore and its people have a reputation for entrepreneurship. though it is generally considered a traditional city, coimbatore is diverse and cosmopolitan. the world classical tamil conference 2010 was held in coimbatore. the heavy industrialisation of the city has also resulted in the growth of trade unions.
language[edit]
tamil is the official language and kongu tamil (also called kangee or kongalam), a dialect, is predominantly spoken. coimbatore also has a significant number of telugus, kannada, malayalis, and north indians, mainly gujaratis. as per the 2011 census, tamil is the most spoken language with 710,326 speakers, followed by telugu (173,136),   kannada (102,000), malayalam (76,485). other languages spoken in the city include urdu (15,484) and hindi (13,608). during the 1970s the city witnessed a population explosion as a result of migration fuelled by increased economic growth and job opportunities.
religion[edit]
religion in coimbatore (2011)  religion  percent(%)   hindu   83.3%   muslim   8.6%   christian   7.5%   other or not stated   0.6%
the city's population is predominantly hindu with minority muslim and christian population. jains, sikhs and buddhists are also present in small numbers. according to the religious census of 2011, coimbatore has 83.31% hindus, 8.63% muslims, 7.53% christians, 0.28% jains, 0.05% sikhs, 0.02% buddhists and 0.01% others. 0.17% of the respondents did not state their religion.
the mariamman festivals at the city's numerous mariamman temples are major events in summer. major hindu temples in the city include the perur patteeswarar temple, naga sai mandir, koniamman temple, thandu mariamman temple, eachanari vinayagar temple, karamadai ranganathaswamy temple, marudamalai murugan temple, loga nayaga shaniswara temple, ashtamsa varadha anjaneyar temple, masani amman temple, dhyanalinga yoga center and the 112-foot adiyogi shiva statue which is the world's tallest bust of lord shiva. the mosques on oppanakara street and big bazaar street date back to the 18th century ce. christian missions date back to the 17th century when permission was granted by the nayak rulers to set up churches in the region. sikh gurudwaras and jain temples are also present in coimbatore.
cuisine[edit]

see also: tamil cuisine
coimbatore cuisine is predominantly south indian with rice as its base. most local restaurants still retain their rural flavor, with many restaurants serving food over a banana leaf. eating on a banana leaf is an old custom and imparts a unique flavor to the food and is considered healthy. north indian, chinese and continental cuisines are also available. idly, dosa, paniyaram and appam are popular dishes.
coimbatore has an active street food culture and various cuisine options for dining. arisi paruppu sadam and sambar sadam, made from a mixture of dal and rice, is a recipe that existed from the 4th century ce that is unique to the area. ariseemparuppu or arisi paruppu satham (literally translated as rice and dal) originated from coimbatore and the people of the city celebrate january 8 as national aruseemparuppu day, after given light by a popular influencer and food consultant. kaalaan is a popular dish prepared by simmering deep-fried mushrooms (usually chopped) in a spicy broth until it reaches a porridge-like consistency; the dish is served sprinkled with chopped onions and coriander leaves. chaats made from potatoes and a mix of other vegetables and spices are also popular.
arts[edit]
swamikannu vincent, who had built the first cinema of south india in coimbatore, introduced the concept of tent cinema in which a tent was erected on an open land to screen the films. central studios was set up in 1935 while s. m. sriramulu naidu established pakshiraja studios in 1945. the city conducts its own music festival every year. art, dance and music concerts are held annually during the months of september and december (tamil calendar month – margazhi). coimbatore also houses a number of museums and art galleries like g.d. naidu museum & industrial exhibition, h a gass forest museum, government museum, kadhi gandhi gallery and kasthuri srinivasan art gallery and textile museum.
