coimbatore
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]

main article: geography of coimbatore
western ghats along the coimbatore-palakkad national highway
coimbatore lies at  wikiminiatlas11°1′6″n 76°58′21″e﻿ / ﻿11.01833°n 76.97250°e﻿ / 11.01833; 76.97250 in south india at 427 metres (1401 ft) above sea level on the banks of the noyyal river, in northwestern tamil nadu. it covers an area of 642.12 km (247.92 sq mi). it is surrounded by the western ghats mountain range to the west and the north, with reserve forests of the nilgiri biosphere reserve on the northern side. the noyyal river forms the southern boundary of the city, which has an extensive tank system fed by the river and rainwater. the eight major tanks and wetland areas of coimbatore are namely, singanallur, valankulam, ukkadam periyakulam, selvampathy, narasampathi, krishnampathi, selvachinthamani, and kumaraswami. multiple streams drain the waste water from the city.
the city is divided into two distinctive geographic regions: the dry eastern side which includes majority of the urban area of the city and the western region which borders the nilgiris, anaimalai and munnar ranges. palghat gap, a mountain pass which connects the neighbouring state of kerala to tamil nadu, lies to the west of the city. because of its location in the biodiversity hotspot of the western ghats, a unesco world heritage site, the city is rich in fauna and flora. the coimbatore urban wetlands harbours around 116 species of birds, of which 66 are resident, 17 are migratory and 33 are local migrants. the spot-billed pelican, painted stork, openbill stork, ibis, indian spot-billed duck, teal and black-winged stilt visit the coimbatore wetlands on their migration. apart from the species common to the plains, various threatened and endangered species such as indian elephants, wild boars, leopards, bengal tigers, gaurs, nilgiri tahr, sloth bear and black-headed oriole are found in the region.
the northern part of the city has a rich tropical evergreen forest with commercially significant trees such as teak, sandalwood, rosewood and bamboo. the soil is predominantly black, which is suitable for cotton cultivation, but some red loamy soil is also found. according to the bureau of indian standards, coimbatore falls under the class iii/iv seismic zone, having experienced an earthquake of magnitude 6.0 on the richter scale on 8 february 1900.
