coimbatore
History[edit]
history[edit]

main articles: history of coimbatore and timeline of coimbatore history
the sugarcane breeding institute at coimbatore, 1928
the region around coimbatore was ruled by the cheras during sangam period between c. 1st and the 4th centuries ce and it served as the eastern entrance to the palakkad gap, the principal trade route between the west coast and tamil nadu. the kosar tribe mentioned in the 2nd century ce tamil epic silappathikaram and other poems in sangam literature is associated with the coimbatore region. the region was located along an ancient roman trade route that extended from muziris to arikamedu. the medieval cholas conquered the kongu nadu in the 10th century. a chola highway called rajakesari peruvazhi ran through the region. much of tamil nadu came under the rule of the vijayanagara empire by the 15th century. in the 1550s, madurai nayaks, who were the military governors of the vijaynagara empire, took control of the region. after the vijayanagara empire fell in the 17th century, the madurai nayaks established their state as an independent kingdom. they introduced the palayakkarar system under which kongu nadu region was divided into 24 palayams(towns).
aerial view of the city, circa 1930
in the latter part of the 18th century, the region came under the kingdom of mysore, following a series of wars with the madurai nayak dynasty. after the defeat of tipu sultan in the anglo-mysore wars, the british east india company annexed coimbatore to the madras presidency in 1799. the coimbatore region played a prominent role in the second poligar war (1801), when it was the area of operations of dheeran chinnamalai. in 1804, coimbatore was established as the capital of the newly formed coimbatore district and in 1866 it was accorded municipality status. sir robert stanes became the first chairman of the coimbatore city council. the region was hard hit during the great famine of 1876–78 resulting in nearly 200,000 famine related fatalities. the first three decades of the 20th century saw nearly 20,000 plague-related deaths and acute water shortage.
the decline of the cotton industry in mumbai fuelled an economic boom in coimbatore in the 1920s and 1930s. the region played a significant role in the indian independence movement with mahatma gandhi visiting the city three times. coimbatore was the base of operations for such political figures as s. p. narasimhalu naidu, r. k. shanmukham chetty, c.s. rathinasabapathy and c. subramaniam during the independence movement. post independence, coimbatore has seen rapid growth due to industrialisation and in 1981 it was constituted as a municipal corporation. on 14 february 1998, the radical islamist group al ummah bombed 11 places across the city killing 58 people and injuring more than 200.
