coimbatore
Utility services[edit]
utility services[edit]
media[edit]

main article: media in coimbatore

see also: list of tamil-language television channels
four major english newspapers the hindu, the times of india, deccan chronicle and the new indian express bring out editions from the city. business line, a business newspaper also brings out a coimbatore edition. tamil newspapers which have coimbatore editions include dinamalar, dina thanthi, dinamani, dinakaran, tamil murasu and maalai malar (both evening newspapers). two malayalam newspapers – malayala manorama and mathrubhumi also have considerable circulation in the city. lotus news is headquartered in coimbatore.
a medium wave radio station is operated by all india radio, with programs in tamil, english and hindi. five fm radio stations operate from coimbatore – rainbow fm, suryan fm, radio mirchi, radio city and hello fm. all these private radio stations air exclusively tamil based programs, including film music. television relay started in 1985 from delhi doordarshan and in 1986, after inception of the repeater tower at kodaikanal, telecast from madras commenced.  in 2005, doordarshan opened its studio in coimbatore. television services are accessible through dth or digital cable.
telecommunication[edit]
coimbatore has a well-connected communications infrastructure. till the 1990s the state owned bharat sanchar nigam limited (bsnl) was the only telecommunication service provider in the city. in the 1990s, private telecom companies too started offering their services. as of 2019, bsnl, reliance communications, bharti airtel, tata communications, tata teleservices, reliance jio and act offer broadband service and fixed line services. mts offers mobile broadband services. cellular telephony was first introduced in 1997 and mobile telephone services available. coimbatore is the headquarters of the tamil nadu circle of cellular service providers.
healthcare[edit]
as of 2010, the size of the health care industry in coimbatore is estimated at ₹1,500 crore (us$190 million). there are around 750 hospitals in the city with an in-patient capacity of 5,000 beds. these hospitals include single speciality institutions like eye care clinics such as the eye foundation, aravind & sankara nethralya, kidney center, ortho center, etc. and also multi special hospitals. the first health care centre in the city was started in 1909. in 1969, it was upgraded to coimbatore medical college hospital and also city has government run esi hospital, which was renovated recently at rs. 5.20 billion with 500 beds. a government run tertiary care hospital with 1020 beds and provides free health care. the city corporation maintains 16 dispensaries and two maternity homes. people from nearby districts and the state of kerala visit coimbatore for medical tourism due to the availability of hospitals and healthcare facilities.
