coimbatore
Education[edit]
education[edit]

see also: list of educational institutions in coimbatore
coimbatore is a major educational hub. the earliest educational institutions established in the city date back to more than a century with c.s.i. boys high school (1831), st. michael's higher secondary school (1860), stanes anglo indian higher secondary school (1862) and st. francis anglo-indian girls school (1898) being the oldest. in 1867, the first group of students appeared for the sslc examinations from coimbatore.
the first college of coimbatore, government arts college, was opened in 1875. the first engineering college in the city, the arthur hope college of technology (now known as the government college of technology, coimbatore), was started by g.d. naidu in 1945 followed later by private engineering colleges psg college of technology, and coimbatore institute of technology in the 1950s. the air force administrative college, established in 1949, is the oldest training institute of the indian air force. coimbatore medical college was opened in 1966 and also city has another government run esic medical college, coimbatore. the government law college started functioning from 1978. the agricultural school established in 1868 was converted into a full-fledged agricultural university. tamil nadu agricultural university in 1971 and the sálim ali centre for ornithology and natural history was opened in 1990.
as of 2010, the district is home to seven universities, 78 engineering colleges, 3 medical colleges, 2 dental colleges, 35 polytechnics and 150 arts and science colleges. the city houses three government run universities tamil nadu agricultural university, bharathiar university, anna university coimbatore and four private universities. the city houses headquarters of renowned multi-campus, multi-disciplinary private deemed university, amrita vishwa vidyapeetham. the city houses government research institutes including the central institute for cotton research, sugarcane breeding research institute, institute of forest genetics and tree breeding (ifgtb), indian council of forestry research and education and tamil nadu institute of urban studies. in 2008, government of india announced a plan to establish a world class university in the region.
three types of schools operate in coimbatore: government run schools, schools funded by the government but run by private trusts (aided schools) and schools funded completely by private trusts. schools were following tamil nadu anglo indian school board like stanes and st francis, tamil nadu state board, matriculation, cbse or icse / isc syllabus. samacheer kalvi (tamil: சமச்சீர் கல்வி) or tamil nadu uniform system of school education or equitable education system was introduced by the tamil nadu uniform system of school education act 2010 to integrate the various school educational systems within the state. several schools in the city have moved on from anglo indian and matriculation systems to cbse and icse/isc syllabus. the city falls under the purview of coimbatore education district. in 2013, 45,863 students appeared for sslc examinations and the pass percentage was 94.12%.
