coimbatore
Sports and recreation[edit]
sports and recreation[edit]
a typical raceday scene at kari motor speedway
voc park
coimbatore is often referred to as "india's motorsports hub" and the "backyard of indian motorsports". s.karivardhan designed and built entry - level race cars and the kari motor speedway, a formula 3 category circuit, is named after him. tyre manufacturer mrf assembles formula ford cars in coimbatore in association with former f3 champion j. anand and racing company super speeds designs formula cars. rallying is another major event with rallies conducted in closed roads around coimbatore. narain karthikeyan, india's first formula one driver hails from the city, and other motorsport drivers from coimbatore include j. anand and v. r. naren kumar.
nehru stadium, built originally for football, also hosts athletic meets. the stadium has been renovated with korean grass for the field and a synthetic track around it for athletics. apart from the stadium, other sporting venues include the coimbatore golf course, an 18 - hole golf course and coimbatore cosmopolitan club, which is more than 100 years old. coimbatore flying club is located in the coimbatore airport premises. the city hosts its own annual marathon called coimbatore marathon as an event to raise cancer awareness. retired tennis player nirupama vaidyanathan, who became the first indian woman in the modern era to feature and win a round at a main draw grand slam in 1998 australian open hails from coimbatore. coimbatore district chess association (cdca), established in 1940, is the oldest chess association in the country.
city based teams[edit]
club sport league home stadium founded   lyca kovai kings  cricket  tamil nadu premier league  snr sons college ground  2016   chennai city f.c.  football  i-league  jawaharlal nehru stadium  2016
recreation[edit]

main article: entertainment in coimbatore
there are several amusement parks around the city: black thunder water theme park near mettupalayam, kovai kondattam amusement park at perur and maharaja theme park at neelambur.  since the 1980s, the city has had a few small shopping complexes and major shopping malls include prozone mall, brookefields mall and fun republic mall. the city also has a number of parks including the voc park, the tamil nadu agricultural university park, race course children's park and bharathi park in saibaba colony. coimbatore zoo houses a number of animals and birds and is located near voc park. the grounds are used for conducting fairs and events including the annual independence day and republic day celebrations. singanallur lake is a popular tourist place and bird watcher destination. popular cinemas include kg cinemas, the cinema by spi cinemas, cinépolis, inox and miraj cinemas.
