coimbatore
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in coimbatore
coimbatore international airportcoimbatore junction railway stationcoimbatore new bus standan intra-city bus operated by tamil nadu state transport corporation
air[edit]

main article: coimbatore international airport
the city is served by the coimbatore international airport at peelamedu 15 km (9.3 mi) from the city centre. the airport commenced operations in 1940 as a civil aerodrome with indian airlines operating fokker f27, douglas dc-3 and later hawker siddeley hs 748 aircraft. the then prime minister of india manmohan singh declared the government's intention to upgrade the coimbatore airport to international status in a meeting with senior ministers on 6 june 2012 and it was granted the status of international airport by the union cabinet on 2 october 2012. the airport is operated by airports authority of india and caters to domestic flights to major indian cities and international flights to sharjah, singapore and sri lanka. as of 2014-15, the airport was the 15th largest airport in india in terms of total aircraft movement, 18th largest in terms of passengers handled and 13th largest in terms of cargo handled. it has a single runway, which is 9,760 feet (2,970 m) in length and is capable of handling large aircraft. air carnival, a private airline commenced its operations in 2016 with the coimbatore international airport as its hub. planetx aerospace operates private helicopter rides from coimbatore to popular tourist hotspots nearby including munnar in kerala and coorg in karnataka.
sulur air force station, located at kangayampalayam is an air base operated by the indian air force and accommodates antonov an-32 heavy air lifter aircraft, mil mi-8 transport helicopters and the hal dhruv helicopters of the sarang helicopter display team. the first squadron of ingeniously built hal tejas will be inducted at sulur afs and sukhoi su-30mki aircraft were stationed at the base by 2016.
rail[edit]

main article: railway stations in coimbatore
train service in coimbatore started in 1861, upon the construction of the podanur – madras line connecting kerala and the west coast with the rest of india. coimbatore lies on the coimbatore – chennai 5 ft 6 in (1,676 mm) broad gauge railway line and the city falls under the salem division of the southern railway zone of indian railways. the major railway station is the coimbatore junction which is the second-largest income generating station in the southern railway zone after chennai central and is amongst the top hundred booking stations of indian railways. other major railway stations catering to the city include coimbatore north junction, podanur junction and minor stations at peelamedu, singanallur, irugur junction, perianaikanpalayam, madukkarai, somanur and sulur. the city is located near the railhead for the nilgiri mountain railway, a unesco world heritage site and mountain railway which goes to the hill station of ooty.
metro rail[edit]

main article: coimbatore metro
in 2017,the tamil nadu government proposed a metro for the city of coimbatore. the systra group was involved to do the feasibility and finalize the routes in the proposed metro rail.the cmrl proposed five corridors in coimbatore metro.
ukkadam bus terminus to kaniyur ukkadam bus terminus to bilichi karanampettai to thaneer panthal ganeshapuram to karunya nagar ukkadam bus terminus to coimbatore integrated bus terminus
road[edit]
there are six major arterial roads in the city: avinashi road, trichy road, sathy road, mettupalayam road, palakkad road, pollachi road and thadagam road. the coimbatore bypass is a series of bypasses connecting the various national highways and state highways passing through and originating from coimbatore. the first section of the bypass, a 28-kilometre (17 mi) stretch from neelambur to madukkarai on national highway 544 opened for traffic in 2000. it was the first road privatisation project to be implemented on a build–operate–transfer model in south india. in 2008, the state highways department came up with a proposal to create a ring road to help de-congest the main arterial roads and the 12 km road would extend from peelamedu to mettupalayam road. in 2011, the chief minister of tamil nadu announced the construction of two new flyovers at ukkadam and athupalam to help de-congest the palakkad road. in 2012, the government of tamil nadu decided in favour of an eastern road that connected mettupalayam road with avinashi road and the existing bypass. the city municipal corporation is undertaking the construction of six rail-over-bridges in the city. there are five national highways passing through the city:
highway number destination via   544 salem perundurai, chithode   kochi palakkad, thrissur   948 bangalore kollegal, chamrajnagar   81 chidambaram karur, tiruchirappalli   181 gundlupet mettupalayam, udagamandalam   83 nagapattinam pollachi, udumalaipettai, palani, oddanchatram, dindigul, tiruchirappalli, thanjavur
apart from state and national highways, the city corporation maintains a 635.32 kilometres (394.77 miles) long road network.
bus[edit]
town buses started operating in 1921 and serve most parts of the city, as well as other towns and villages in the district. the number of inter-city routes operated by coimbatore division is 119 with a fleet of more than 500 buses. it also operates town buses on 257 intra-city routes. the intra-city buses operate from major bus stations in gandhipuram central bus terminus, singanallur bus terminus, ukkadam bus terminus and saibaba colony bus terminus to other parts across the city. inter-city and intra-city buses that connect coimbatore operate from different bus stands:
location bus station destinations   gandhipuram central tiruppur, erode, salem, dharapuram, gobichettipalayam, mettur, sathyamangalam, kangayam   setc chennai, ernakulam, bangalore, hyderabad, tirupati, thrissur, puducherry, thiruvananthapuram, mysuru   omni bus stand private mofussil buses   singanallur singanallur madurai, tirunelveli, tiruchirappalli, thanjavur, karur, kumbakonam, theni, dindigul   ukkadam ukkadam palakkad, thrissur, palani, pollachi, udumalpet   mettupalayam road coimbatore north mettupalayam, udagamandalam
the coimbatore integrated bus terminus planned at vellalore is under construction. the proposed terminus will be built at a cost of ₹ 168 crores.
coimbatore brts is a proposed bus rapid transit project under the jnnurm scheme of the government of india. it is planned along a 27.6 kilometres (17.1 mi) stretch connecting avinashi road and mettupalayam road. the city is also served by auto rickshaws and radio taxi services like uber, ola cabs, redtaxi, gotaxi, zoomcar, avis. coimbatore has four regional transport offices viz. tn 37 (south), tn 38 (north), tn 66 (central), tn 99 (west).
