coimbatore
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

main article: economy of coimbatore
lakshmi mills was one of the earliest textile mills in coimbatore
coimbatore is one of the largest exporters of software. pictured is tidel park, an it sez.
codissia trade center, coimbatore
a street scene in coimbatore, tamil nadu, india
a major hub for manufacturing, education and healthcare in tamil nadu, coimbatore is among the fastest growing tier-ii cities in india. it houses more than 25,000 small, medium and large industries with the primary industries being engineering and textiles. coimbatore is called the "manchester of south india" due to its extensive textile industry, fed by the surrounding cotton fields. tidel park coimbatore in elcot sez was the first special economic zone (sez) set up in 2006. in 2010, coimbatore ranked 15th in the list of most competitive (by business environment) indian cities. coimbatore also has a 160,000 square feet (15,000 m) trade fair ground, built in 1999 and is owned by codissia.
coimbatore region experienced a textile boom in the 1920s and 1930s. though, robert stanes had established coimbatore's first textile mills as early as the late 19th century, it was during this period that coimbatore emerged as a prominent industrial centre. in 2009 coimbatore was home to around 15% of the cotton spinning capacity in india. coimbatore has trade associations such as codissia, coindia and cojewel representing the industries in the city. coimbatore houses a number of textile mills and is the base of textile research institutes like the sardar vallabhbhai patel international school of textiles & management, central institute for cotton research (cicr) and the south india textile research institute (sitra). kovai cora cotton saree is a recognised geographical indication.
coimbatore is the second largest producer of software in the state, next to capital chennai. tidel park coimbatore and other information technology parks in the city has aided in the growth of it and business process outsourcing industries in the city. it is ranked at 17th among the top global outsourcing cities by tholons. software exports stood at ₹7.1 billion (us$89 million) for the financial year 2009–10 up 90% from the previous year. coimbatore has a large and diversified manufacturing sector and a number of engineering colleges producing about 50,000 engineers annually. due to huge demand from it companies for space at coimbatore, tidel park coimbatore-phase-ii is planned to be built within elcot sez on an additional 9 acres of land with 5 lakh sq.feet space at ₹ 250 crores. ticel bio-park iii, a bio-technology park is being constructed in 10 acres of land at somayampalayam, coimbatore.
coimbatore is a major centre for the manufacture of automotive components in india with car manufacturers maruti udyog and tata motors sourcing up to 30%, of their automotive components from the city. g.d. naidu developed india's first indigenous motor in 1937. india's first indigenously developed diesel engine for cars was manufactured in the city in 1972. the city is also a major centre for small auto component makers catering to the automobile industry, from personal to commercial and farm vehicles. the city contributes to about 75% of the 1 lakh total monthly output of wet grinders in india. the industry employs 70,000 people and had a yearly turnover of ₹2,800 crore (us$350 million) in 2015. the term "coimbatore wet grinder" has been given a geographical indication.
coimbatore is also referred to as "the pump city" as it supplies nearly 50% of india's requirements of motors and pumps. coimbatores largest pump manufacturer cri pumps, contributes a lot towards the "pump city" status of coimbatore. the city is one of the largest exporters of jewellery renowned for diamond cutting, cast and machine made jewellery. there are about 3,000 jewellery manufacturers employing over 40,000 goldsmiths.
coimbatore has a large number of poultry farms and is a major producer of chicken eggs. the city contributes to nearly 95% of processed chicken meat exports. coimbatore has some of the country's oldest flour mills and these mills which cater to all the southern states, have a combined grinding capacity of more than 50,000 mt per month. the hospitality industry has seen a growth in the 21st century with new upscale hotels being set up. coimbatore is the largest non-metro city for e-commerce in south india.
