coimbatore
Administration and politics[edit]
administration and politics[edit]

main articles: administration of coimbatore and coimbatore city municipal corporation
administrative officials   title  name   mayor  thirumathi kalpana. a   deputy mayor  thiru vetri selvam. r   district collector  thiru sammeran.s ias   commissioner  thiru kumaravel pandian, ias   police commissioner  thiru sumit sharan, ips
coimbatore is a municipal corporation administered by the coimbatore municipal corporation and is the administrative headquarters of coimbatore district. coimbatore was established as the capital of coimbatore district in 1804 and in 1866, it was accorded municipality status. in 1981, coimbatore was elevated as a municipal corporation. the city is divided into five administrative zones – east, west, north, south and central, each further subdivided into 20 wards. each ward is represented by a councillor who is elected by direct election and the mayor of coimbatore is elected by councillors. the executive wing of the corporation is headed by a corporation commissioner and maintains basic services like water supply, sewage and roads. the district itself is administered by the district collector and the district court in coimbatore is the highest court of appeal in the district. the coimbatore city police is headed by a commissioner of police and there are 18 police stations in the city.
race course road, coimbatore
a large part of the coimbatore urban agglomeration falls outside the municipal corporation limits. these suburbs are governed by local bodies called village panchayats and town panchayats. besides the coimbatore municipal corporation, the coimbatore urban agglomeration comprises the town panchayats of vellalur, irugur, pallapalayam, kannampalayam, veerapandi, periyanaickenpalayam, narasimhanaickenpalayam, idikarai, vedapatti, perur, madukkarai, ettimadai, thondamuthur, uliyampalayam, thirumalayampalayam, othakalmandapam, alanthurai, pooluvapatti, thenkarai, karumathampatti, sarcarsamakulam, mopperipalayam and gudalur, census towns of ashokapuram, kurudampalayam, malumichampatti, selvapuram, chettipalayam, sulur, chinniampalayam, somayampalayam, muthugoundan pudur, arasur, kaniyur, neelambur and municipalities of kuniyamuthur, kurichi and goundampalayam. these local bodies are in turn split into wards each electing a councillor through direct election. the head of the local body, known as the president, is elected by the councillors from among their number.
coimbatore elects ten members to the tamil nadu legislative assembly and one member to the indian parliament. the six legislative assembly constituencies in the city are coimbatore north, coimbatore south, kaundampalayam, singanallur and thondamuthur and kinathukadavu which form a part of the coimbatore parliamentary constituency. part of the urban agglomeration comes under the nilgiris and pollachi constituencies. in the indian general election held in 2019, cpi (m) candidate p.r. natarajan defeated c. p. radhakrishnan of the bjp in the lok sabha constituency. in the last legislative assembly election held in 2021, the aiadmk led front won in all five assembly constituencies.
