cuttack
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
cuttack is widely known as the commercial capital of odisha. it is believed to have the largest gdp among all cities in odisha due to its large business houses and a wide range of industries ranging from ferrous alloys, steel and logistics to agriculture and traditional industries like textiles and handicrafts. there are many trading houses in the city renowned nationally and internationally. the paradip port which is around 85 km from the city facilitates this process.
traditional industries[edit]
tarakasi (silver filigree) pendant and ear rings
the city is one of the largest hub for textiles in eastern india. the city's annual textile trade generates over a billion dollars of revenue. a large textile park is planned, giving a facelift to the erstwhile orissa textile mills in city outskirts. cuttack is famous for its silver filigree works and only because of these works it is also known as the silver city of india. cuttack is also famous for its handicraft works using cow and mostly buffaloes horn. cuttack has only one retail store for horn items named utkal gaurab madhusudhan horn work. it was greatly contributed by late kalandi charana behera. generally, the horn of dead cattle is used and it is performed by licensed craftsmen only. this peculiar artefact is limited to cuttack only and anything of such kind is found nowhere else in the world. these fine and unique handicraft works add significantly to the local economy.
industrial corridor and special economic zone[edit]

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (november 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
there are 11 large-scale industries in and around cuttack mostly in choudwar and athagarh and many more in the pipeline. these industries include steel, power, automobile, alloys, fireclay, etc. indian metals & ferro alloys (imfa), the country's largest producer of ferrous alloys is in choudwar, cuttack. a mega-auto complex is in implementation stages on the city's outskirts. cuttack occupies a very significant place in the logistics map of the country. the number of medium- and small-scale industries concentrated around cuttack is by far the largest among the cities in the state. the industrial estates in and around cuttack numbers around eight. jagatpur and khapuria are industrial estates inside the city. a large chunk of these serve as ancillary industries for the big industrial houses in odisha and other states.
service sector[edit]

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (november 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
being the former capital and now the partial capital of the state and a big business hub, many central and state government and corporate offices are in cuttack. the service sector is quite large. the people of nearby districts are heavily depended on the city for their livelihood, contributing to the service sector and, thus, the floating population. the presence of central rice research institute (crri), the largest rice research institute in asia, adds to the importance of cuttack in the agricultural map of the country. the presence of odisha high court and the scb medical & college, the largest medical institution in the state, further nourishes the service sector. education is a major industry due to large number of universities, colleges, schools and coaching centres and caters to the neighbouring districts. the proximity to paradip port comes as an added advantage. osl group, one of the leading stevedore firms of the country is headquartered in cuttack. cuttack, being the largest business hub of the state is the nodal point of trade and transport. it also has the largest wholesale commodities market of the state at malgodown and chhatra bazaar catering the whole state.
media[edit]
the samaja office
cuttack has a doordarshan centre which telecasts odia programs. the cuttack station of all india radio started post-independence in 1948 and broadcasts programs in am as well as fm bandwidth catering the whole state. at present cuttack has six local radio stations broadcasting on fm, including two from air. the private fm stations include 91.9 sarthak fm, big 92.7 fm, red 93.5 fm and radio choklate 104 fm.
among several print media houses located at cuttack, the oriya newspapers published here includes the samaja (founded by utkala mani gopabandhu das), prajatantra (founded by harekrushna mahatab, former chief minister of odisha and former governor of maharashtra),  sambad, dharitri and the matrubhasha to name a few.
