cuttack
Education[edit]
education[edit]
schools and colleges in cuttack[edit]
schools in cuttack are either run by the cuttack municipal corporation or by private trusts and individuals. the odia medium schools in cuttack are affiliated to the board of secondary education, odisha whilst the english medium affiliated to either icse or the cbse. apart from english and odia medium schools, certain hindi, urdu, gujarati, bengali and telugu medium schools are also present in cuttack. ravenshaw collegiate school, the oldest school of odisha which proudly boasts many eminent personalities in its alumni including netaji subash chandra bose, biju patnaik, harekrushna mahatab, etc. is situated in cuttack. some of the other prominent odia medium schools of the city include secondary board high school, jobra high schooljobra high school, ravenshaw girls high school, ranihat high school, nua bazar high school, odisha police high school, christ collegiate school, kamalakanta vidayapitha, peary mohan academy, badambadi new colony high school, matrubhaban school & college, cuttackmatrubhaban school & college, buckley girls school, crri high school.
the city has a number of saraswati shishu mandirs and cbse schools. the prominent public schools are sai international residential school (sirs), d.a.v. public school, sector-6, cda, l.r.d.a.v public school, gandarpur, d.a.v. public school, rajabagicha, jawahar navodaya vidyalaya, kendriya vidyalaya no.1, kendriya vidyalaya no.2, mahanadi vihar, kendriya vidyalaya no.3, kendriya vidyalaya arc charbatia, stewart school, new stewart school, delhi public school kalinga, st. xavier's high school, sri sathya sai school, st. joseph's girls high school, s.c.b. medical public school, cambridge school, joharimall high school, modern public school, queen mary's school etc. netaji subhas chandra bose studied at stewart school briefly before moving to ravenshaw collegiate school.
under the 10+2+3/4 plan, students complete ten years of schooling and then enroll for two years in junior college, where they select one of three streams: arts, commerce, or science. this is followed by either a general degree course in a chosen field of study, or a professional degree course, such as law, engineering, and medicine. most of the colleges in the city are affiliated to the council of higher secondary education. some of the prominent colleges include ravenshaw college, stewart science college, christ college, choudwar college, choudwar women's college, cuttack college, jatiya kabi bira kishore (j.k.b.k.) college, netaji city college, raghunathjew college, sailabala women's college, emarti devi women's college, indira gandhi women's college, city women's college, sri aurobindo institute of higher studies & research, kishore nagar college, kandarpur college. sailabala women's college established in 1913 is the oldest women's college in odisha.
universities and institutes of higher education and research[edit]
the twin cities account for around 100 engineering colleges. cuttack is home to several technical institutions which include institute of management and information technology (imit), bhubananda orissa school of engineering(bose), institute of textile technology (itt), dhaneshwar rath institute of engineering & management studies (driems), image institute of technology & management (iitm), ajay binay institute of technology (abit), institute of professional studies and research (ipsar), jagannath institute of engineering and technology, barabati institute of management studies etc. some of the other institutes include biju pattnaik institute of film and television and the madhusudan law college. madhusudan law college has been declared to be upgraded as a university.
established in 1869 as cuttack normal school, converted to cuttack training school in 1875 and later in 1923 as secondary training school, later renamed as radhanath training school, after the eminent teacher and poet radhanath ray, now known as radhanatha institute of advanced studies in education (rniase) offers various teaching courses, is located adjacent to the campus wall of ravenshaw collegiate school and in front of swaraj asrama in bakharabad is the oldest institute in the state. also in 1912, odisha's only urdu teacher training school was established in sheikh bazar which is now only the muslim minority govt elementary teacher education institution in odisha where every year 100 pupil teachers complete their elementary teacher training.
national law university odisha (nluo)[edit]
cuttack is the home to the national law university odisha, one of the 14 nlu's in india, which was established under the national law university odisha act of 2008, the national law university(nlu cuttack). it is one of the  institutes for legal education in india funded by the central as well as the state government. housed in a sprawling campus the university sees a host of legal luminaries who impart education to the students.
ravenshaw seven pillars of wisdom
madhusudan law university (mlu)[edit]
cuttack houses odisha's oldest law college, madhusudan law college. in 1869 the law course was introduced in the ravenshaw collegiate school, thereafter it continued in the ravenshaw college. that time the bachelor of law course was under the university of calcutta and after the foundation of utkal university in 1943 the madhusudan law college was also established in the same year. this college is named after national leader and politician madhusudan das. with effect from june 2020, madhusudan law college has been upgraded to madhusudan law university. as per the notification from dhe odisha, "[a]ll the existing government and private law colleges, except the constituent law colleges of different universities of the state shall be affiliated and cease to be affiliated from their respective universities from that date and direct that the said university shall have jurisdiction, save as aforesaid, over all law colleges of the state."
ravenshaw university[edit]
ravenshaw university is one of the oldest institutes of india and the oldest college of the state which was founded by thomas edward ravenshaw in 1868 and was granted university status on 15 november 2006. ravenshaw university came into existence on 15 november 2006. it was an up-gradation of ravenshaw college established in 1868, one of the oldest and largest colleges in india which subsequently became an autonomous college with cpe status by ugc and 'a' grade by naac.
sri sri university[edit]
sri sri university at naraj
sri sri university established by sri sri ravi shankar and art of living is situated at the far end of the city in naraj. it came into operation in the year 2012.
national rice research institute (nrri)[edit]
asia's largest rice research institute, the central rice research institute (crri) is situated in cuttack. in 1945, the government of india decided to establish a central institute for rice research. as a result, the central rice research institute (crri) was set up on 23 april 1946 at bidhyadharpur, cuttack, odisha with an experimental farmland of 60 hectares provided by government of orissa. the crri is one of the institutes of the icar under the division of crop sciences. the institute has two research stations- central rainfed upland rice research station (crurrs), hazaribagh, in jharkhand, and the regional rainfed lowland rice research station (rrlrrs), gerua, in assam. these research stations were established to tackle the problems of rainfed uplands, and flood-prone rainfed lowlands, respectively. two krishi vigyan kendras (kvks) also function under the crri and guided by the ddg (agril. extension). these kvks are located at santhapur, cuttack and jainagar, koderma.
srirama chandra bhanja medical college and hospital (scbmch)[edit]
shri ramachandra bhanj medical college (scb), the largest medical college of the state is located in cuttack. the s.c.b. medical college also has a dental wing which offers bachelor's degree in dental sciences. acharya harihar regional cancer centre (ahrcc), the only one of its kind in eastern india, carries out high-end research and treatment in cancer. the regional spinal injury centre (rsic) is also situated in the s.c.b. medical college campus. rsic is an autonomous organisation under the administrative and financial control of department of health & family welfare, government of odisha and is headed by the director of the rsic which provides rehabilitation measures to persons with disabilities especially spinal injury.
swami vivekananda national institute of rehabilitation training and research (svnirtar)[edit]
svnitar is an institute in the field of rehabilitation. swami vivekanand national institute of rehabilitation training and research (svnirtar) is an autonomous body under department of empowerment of persons with disabilities (divyangjan), ministry of social justice and empowerment, govt. of india. it provides total medical rehabilitation for the persons with locomotor disabilities. it also conducts three bachelor's degree courses in physiotherapy, occupational therapy, prosthetics and orthotics, three postgraduate courses of physiotherapy, occupational therapy and prosthetics and orthotics affiliated to utkal university, bhubaneswar. it also has an accreditation for dnb in physical medicine and rehabilitation of national board of examination (nbe), new delhi.
sardar vallabhbahai patel post graduate institute of paediatrics (svppgip)[edit]
svppgip also known as shishu bhawan is the largest paediatrics hospital in eastern india. sardar vallabhbhai patel post graduate institute of paediatrics (sishubhawan), cuttack, orissa is based on manifold historic backgrounds situated on the bank of river kathjori amidst the lush greenery. this palatial building was the center of administration during mugul, maratha and british regime from 1568 a.d. till independence. after independence this building was known as "rajbhawan" where governor of orissa used to stay.
biju pattnaik film and television institute of odisha (bpftio)[edit]
the government of odisha has established an autonomous institute in the name and style of biju pattnaik film & television institute of orissa (bpftio) under world bank assisted scheme to meet the emerging demand of well trained technical manpower in the field of television network and film production activities. situated on the bank of river mahanadi, bpftio occupies an independent space in the sprawling campus of bhubanananda orissa school of engineering (bose), cuttack the oldest engineering school of the state. funded by government of odisha, department of employment and technical education & training, the institute offers diploma courses in 3 disciplines such as cinematography, sound & tv. engineering and film & video editing.
