cuttack
Sports[edit]
sports[edit]
cuttack is the sports hub of odisha. it is the host to the famous barabati stadium as well as many other stadium and grounds. cuttack has a branch of sports authority of india (sai) training centres, which was established on 26 march 1987 under sports hostel scheme in the barabati sports complex. the authority is responsible for training in athletics, basketball, football, volleyball, and gymnastics.
sachin tendulkar indoor hall
barabati sports complex[edit]
cuttack is the home to the barabati sports complex. the barabati stadium is an important venue for international cricket and football matches. the barabati sports complex hosts the head offices of most of the sports bodies of the state. apart from cricket and football, the sports complex also has facilities for lawn tennis, basketball, volleyball, swimming. the sports complex also houses an indoor hall christened as sachin tendulkar indoor hall, dedicated to legendary cricketer sachin tendulkar. the construction of the indoor hall was a joint venture of the odisha cricket association and the board of control for cricket in india which was formally inaugurated on the auspicious occasion of utkal divas. the centrally air-conditioned 185 feet long, 65 feet wide and 44 feet high four-storied complex has been built primarily to provide practise facility to cricketers during off season. the complex is also used to stage competitions in different indoor sports including basketball, volleyball, badminton, table tennis, fencing, judo, weight-lifting and wrestling.
jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium
jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium[edit]
east india's second and odisha's only indoor arena, jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium is situated in cuttack. the indoor arena is primarily used for gymnastics and martial arts. it has hosted many international and national sporting events in the past. it is also used to host musical concerts and award shows. it hosted the 21st edition of the commonwealth table tennis championships from 17 to 21 july 2019. it will host the bwf world tour tournament odisha open from 2022 onwards.
satyabrata stadium[edit]
this is situated inside the fort area and is primarily used for athletics and soccer. it has a concrete track used for athletics and synthetic basketball courts. it is used by the locals for jogging and morning exercises too.
jagatpur water sports complex[edit]
cuttack is also the only hub in odisha for water sports. the rowing & sculling association of odisha is situated in cuttack at jagatpur. the water sports events are facilitated in the river birupa.
the driems stadium at tangi has also hosted international cricket matches and is a regular venue for ranji trophy matches.  cuttack also has some very good sporting grounds like nimpur grounds, bidanasi grounds, sunshine grounds, ravenshaw grounds, scb medical grounds, bose grounds which are the venues for annual state cricket and football championships and some of which are often used as additional venues for ranji trophy and santosh trophy matches.
cuttack along with mumbai has hosted the 2013 women's cricket world cup. apart from it, cuttack has also hosted matches in 1987 cricket world cup and 1996 cricket world cup. the 18th and 24th national games were held in cuttack in 1958 and 1970 respectively.
