cuttack
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
show zoomed outshow zoomed midshow zoomed inshow all
air[edit]
cuttack has an air base named charbatia air base for the exclusive use for light exercises and on and off training purposes of the indian air force. the nearest commercial airport is the biju patnaik international airport at bhubaneswar, about 28 km away but the establishment of an airport in cuttack, at choudwar or naraj to serve such a large population in and around the city is needed.
badambadi bus stand
road[edit]
on 28 april 2010, the ministry of road transport and highways officially published a new numbering system for the national highway network in the gazette of the government of india. as per the new numbering national highway 16 (former national highway 5) runs from north to south of the city. as a part of the golden quadrilateral project, this highway runs from chennai to kolkata. national highway 55 (former national highway 42) connects cuttack with sambalpur. also asian highway 45 passes through the city. feeder state highways connect cuttack to jajpur, paradeep, talcher, angul, kendrapara and nearby towns in cuttack district. intra city transport is primarily through auto rickshaws. nowadays dts city buses ply in the city to join different places in the city and the state capital. cuttack is a major junction connecting all the major parts of the state. the bus terminus at cuttack is located at badambadi, and is one of the largest bus terminus in india, and thousands of private and government buses ply to hundreds of destinations every day. a new inter-state bus terminus (isbt) at balikuda is under construction to relieve pressure off the badambadi bus terminus. cuttack is now more strongly connected to bhubaneswar and dhenkanal due to the addition of two new bridges namely netaji subhas chandra bose setu on kathjodi and utkal gourab madhusudan setu on mahanadi. the former is the longest road bridge in odisha.
rail[edit]
cuttack junction railway station
cuttack junction is one of the stations on the howrah-chennai main line of the east coast railway and falls under the khurda road division. a branch line to paradeep starts from cuttack. it is connected to all parts of india through trains run by the indian railways. the cuttack railway station is selected to be developed as a multi-functional railway station with food courts shopping plaza, theatres to be developed . other railway stations in the city are barang junction railway station, balikuda, matagajpur, kandarpur, katha jori, kendrapara road, kapilas road, manguli, nergundi and naraj. the mahanadi rail bridge is the 5th longest rail bridge in india.
mass rapid transit system (mrts)[edit]
the government of odisha has proposed a rapid transit system for the cities of cuttack and bhuabneswar. on 23 august 2014, government of odisha's housing and urban development department signed a memorandum of understanding with balaji railroad systems ltd (barsyl) for preparation of a detailed project report (dpr) for mass rapid transit system (mrts) between cuttack and bhubaneswar. the balaji railroad systems ltd (barsyl) would get rs 25 million for preparation of dpr for approximately 30 km within a period of ten months. the government officials said it would be a testing for them to evict encroachments for expansion of roads in the twin cities.
the government of odisha is working on introduction of monorail service in cuttack. the housing and urban development department has taken up the issue for exploring monorail system in cuttack to make it the first city in the state to have monorail service. a study on the viability of launching the monorail over an eight to 10 km stretch in the city is expected to be carried out soon. the engineering projects (india) ltd would conduct a comprehensive survey of the city's capacity to host the system as well as the traffic and congestion problems and submit a proposal. the initially proposed route of circular ring road has been ruled out as it was not considered feasible on traffic considerations. while badambadi-madhupatana link road stretch is the most congested with traffic density crossing 300 per minute, thoroughfares like choudhury bazar college square, mangalabag, buxi bazaar, chandni chowk, cda square see peak flow of over 100 vehicles per minute are more likely to be taken into consideration.
