cuttack
Art and literature[edit]
art and literature[edit]

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (november 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
cuttack has been the home to many notable personalities who have contributed a lot towards the culture and history of modern odisha. it is rightly called the cultural capital.
drama and theater culture[edit]
cuttack had been the centre of art and literature in the past. annapurna theatre is considered as the pioneer of oriya theatre company. the b-group of the annapurna theatre, situated in buxi bazar is also one of the oldest theatres of odisha. kala vikash kendra in cuttack is another premier institution for dance, drama and music in odisha. it organizes international theatre olympiads annually where artists from different countries participate along with the local artists. sarala sahitya sansad, utkal sahitya samaj and marwari yuva manch are some other organisations contributing to the rich culture of odisha.
libraries, art galleries and auditoriums[edit]
cuttack has been the seat of various literary activities and many notable writers and poets lived and worked here. there are many old libraries in cuttack including the first library of the state kanika library at ravenshaw university, biswanath pandit central library, odisha urdu library, madhusudan library, pk padhihari pathagara, bakul library, biren mitra library etc. cmc sahid bhawan has a big art gallery for exhibitions. town hall, kvk, sahid bhawan, satabdi bhawan, sarala bhawan etc. are the prominent auditoriums in the city.
biju pattnaik film and television institute of odisha at jobra
odia film industry[edit]
the odia film industry has its base in cuttack. the oriya film industry is popularly known as ollywood, the name is a portmanteau of the words oriya and hollywood. in 1974, the government of odisha declared film making and construction of cinema theatres as industry in the state, and two years later in 1976, it established the orissa film development corporation in cuttack. one of the regional offices for central board of film certification is situated in cuttack.
movie theatres[edit]
the city has several cinemas playing movies in odia, hindi and english languages. historically, cuttack accounted for almost half of the number of cinema halls in the state but eventually, those numbers declined. presently, cuttack hosts five single-screen movie theatres name grand, brindaban, samrat, nishamani and jayashree. it also houses two multiplexes namely inox and sangam; the former being the state's second four-screen multiplex after its bhubaneswar branch. odisha's first cinema hall marks its beginning from cuttack. in 1926 a mobile cinema hall named chameria cinema company showed films. thereafter annapurna theatre came into existence. in 1932 hallmuk cinema hall marked its beginning at tinkonia bagicha. movies like harischandra and odia first movie sita bibah screen from this cinema hall in 1934. another cinema hall named capital cinema was also built in tinkonia bagicha in 1936. second odia film lalita release from this hall. similarly, in 1944-45 pravat cinema hall near baropathar, in 1951 hind cinema was built. in 1962 united talkies came into existence in saheed bhawan. thereafter parvati talkies also built in kalyanmandap of cuttack municipality. in 1969 grand cinema and suraj talkies, 1972 jyoti cinema which renamed as laxmi hall came into existence. 1979 durga hall, 1980 nisamani hall, samrat hall, 1982 brundaban hall, sagar sangam hall, devi cinema, 1983 rajtarangini, 1985 jaysree talkies came into existence. inox multiplex opened in 2018, as odisha's second after bhubaneswar inox.
