cuttack
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (november 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
pilgrimage sites[edit]
cuttack chandi deity
cuttack chandi temple[edit]
dedicated to the goddess chandi, the presiding deity of cuttack. the cuttack chandi temple is located in proximity to the banks of the mahanadi river. it is famous for its annual durga puja and kali puja festivals. the durga puja festivities are prominent in maa katak chandi temple which takes place for 16 days starting from dark fortnight of ashwina krishna ashtami till ashwina shukla navami and vijayadashami. the goddess popularly called as maa kataka chandi, sits and rules on the heart of the ancient city. gada chandi temple situated within the premises of the barabati fort is one of the oldest temples in cuttack and is believed to be the older temple of cuttack chandi before her shift to the present cuttack chandi temple.
dhabaleshwar temple[edit]
dedicated to the worship of lord shiva dhabaleswar temple is situated on an exotic island in the mahanadi river and is embellished with stone carvings that date back to the early 10th and 11th century.  the island is connected to the mainland on the other side by a suspension bridge which is the first and only of its kind in the state.
paramhansa nath temple[edit]
dhabaleswara bridge
paramhansa nath temple, biribat built, 11th a.d. 4 km from the cuttack - paradeep road. approach from omp square, towards nuabazar and keep going until you see a sign board of the temple to take a right. this is situated right on banks of river kathajodi. the other approach would be from the panchamukhi hanuman temple at khapuria. road along the river bank will lead you to the temple another hidden gem of katak, and it is still standing upright 80 ft for 1000 years. this is a five-chambered rekha and pidha shrine. the vimana is of pancharatha rekha style.  the doorjambs of the vimana and the bhogomandapa portray sculptures of the navagraha and dvarapalas. the plinth of the temple exhibits sculptures portraying war scenes, elephants and horses in procession, decorated swans.  in the sanctum is a patal-phuta shiva linga. there is a wooden canopy and possibly added sometime in the mid-15th or 16th century. other deities around the temple are parvati, kartikeya and ganesh. a big bull figure and a rama-abhisekha images are found on the northern wall of the temple. two vishnu images are found on the outer walls of the temple. built by somavanshi dynasty.
baba ramdev temple[edit]
baba ramdev temple
the temple is located beside the cuttack – bhubaneswar national highway. it is built entirely of white marble. ramdev pir is a hindu folk deity of rajasthan in india. ramdev is considered to be an incarnation of krishna. he was said to have had miraculous powers, and his fame reached far and wide. legend has it that five pirs from mecca came to test ramdev's powers.
qadam e rasool[edit]
believed to be for the veneration of muhammad. it comes from the belief started early in islam that when muhammad stepped on a rock his footprint left an imprint. this belief was not accepted by wahabbi influenced sub-sects of islam. however, the idea was disseminated widely and led to the creation of many shrines around such imprints one of them being situated in cuttack.
jama masjid[edit]
built during the mughal era. earlier there used to be a madrasa in this mosque. however, since a decade, the madrasa is shifted out. the neighbourhood surrounding the jama masjid is inhabited predominantly by hindus.
gurdwara guru nanak daatan sahib[edit]
a holy historical sikh shrine, the daatan sahib gurdwara is where the first sikh guru, shree guru nanak, halted on his way to puri. it is believed that a tree branch planted by him after using it as a tooth cleaner still flourishes here, hence the name daatan sahib.
bukhari baba peer
bukhari baba dargah[edit]
bukhari baba dargah, one of the well known dargahs in the silver city, draws a huge crowd, especially on thursdays. people from diverse religions come here to offer prayer to get their wishes fulfilled. the ancient dargah of sufi saint sayeed ali saheed bukhari, popularly known as bukhari baba's majjar, is situated near barabati fort in cuttack. the structure with a white dome is an example of mughal architecture built in 1468. it attracts devotees from across the state. not only muslim but even people of other religions are regular 'murid' of the 'dargah'. around two lakh devotees visit the sacred shrine annually.
digambar jain mandir[edit]
there are four jain temples in cuttack city which were established by digambar and swetambar jain sects who had migrated to cuttack from uttar pradesh and rajasthan. these are situated at choudhury bazar, jaunliapatty, alamchand bazar and kaji bazar, tirthankara images have been installed in these temples. digambar jain temple at choudhury bazar was constructed during the second half of the 20th century and is remarkable for its artistic design.
the church of epiphany[edit]
although there are several churches in cuttack, the oldest among them all is the church of epiphany on the cantonment road built in the year 1865. this iconic brick structure is an example of the british era colonial architecture.
goddess durga idol in chaudhury bazar
other famous temples in cuttack are gada chandi temple, khannagar sai mandir, amareswar temple, raghunath jew temple, ramakriskna mission, maa jhanjhirimangala temple, dolamundai jagannath temple, chahata ram mandir, badambadi siddhivinayak temple, khannagar kali mandir, kalia boda shani temple, etc. cuttack also houses many churches including holy rosary church and oriya baptist church.
festivals[edit]
durga puja: cuttack is famous throughout the nation for its durga puja celebrations. nearly 200 earthen idols of goddess durga are prepared by the different puja committees of the city to worship goddess durga the speciality cuttack durga puja are its durga puja suna medha, in which the idols are adorned with huge amounts of gold and silver, with localities trying to outsmart each other by constructing more attractive idols. cuttack celebrates durga puja with full energy on maha saptami, maha ashtami, maha navami and on vijaya dashami or dussehra by burning an effigy of the demon ravana. people from all of odisha and nearby states visit cuttack during this period observe the famous festival. boita bandana: this festival is celebrated on the last day of the holy hindu month of kartik. on this auspicious day people flow miniature boitas or model boats in the mahanadi and kathajodi rivers to pay homage to the ancient merchants of kalinga kingdom. this day also marks the beginning of bali jatra. this festival is similar to the masakapam kepesih festival of bali, and to the loi krathong festival of thailand, both of which involve ritualistic floating of model boats around the same time of year bali jatra: the festival which the people of cuttack await the most is the bali jatra. bali yatra is supposedly the second largest trade festival in asia and the largest in india. the name bali jatra literally means a voyage to bali. in olden times, merchants used to trade with south-east asian island countries of bali, java, sumatra, borneo. whatever items they brought from those places after trading oriya goods used to be put up for sale in the capital (which was then cuttack). people from all over the state and beyond used to come to cuttack to buy these items. bali jatra is the festival of continuing this ancient tradition. it is held every year in november on the banks of the mahanadi. many stalls are set up selling both local and exotic goods. people from all over odisha come to the bali jatra to buy items, as was the custom back in those days. kali puja: this festival is dedicated to the hindu goddess kali and is celebrated on the new moon day of the hindu month of kartik. it coincides with the pan-indian festival of diwali amidst the bursting of firecrackers.  bali jatra entrance gate kartikeshwar puja: the puja in cuttack is organized by the puja committees of cuttack. this festival is observed to worship kartikeya, the eldest son of lord shiva. nowhere else except sabarimala is the kartikeswar puja carried out with so much elan. bada osha: this is unique to dhabaleswar temple. special bhoga namely gaja and tarana are prepared on this day for the worshippers. manabasa gurubara was unique of cuttack odisha later celebrated by east odisha, west odisha is worship to goddess laxmi. kite flying is also celebrated with much enthusiasm and energy in the city. kite-flying culminates with the makar sankranti, with kite-flying competitions being held all over. cuttack is the first city in the eastern india to introduce kite-flying.
all the other regular indian festivals like ratha yatra, raja, ganesh chaturthi, vasant panchami, holi, diwali, chhath, eid, good friday, christmas, and the numerous festivals are celebrated here.
cuisine[edit]
cuttack dahibara aloodam
cuttack is the street food capital of odisha. it is famous for its dahibara aludam, a local delicacy made using black gram (a cousin of the mung bean) and potato curry.chhena poda and rasagulla from salepur by bikalananda kar are local desserts made of unripened curd cheese made from buffalo or cow milk. apart from dahibara aloodam: chaat, gupchup (puchuka/panipuri) and samosas rule the streets. the city has major food joints like chandini chowk, bidanasi, stadium road, buxi bazar, dolamundai, choudhary bazar, etc. thunka puri is a famous delicacy available only during baliyatra. traditional oriya food such as dahi-pakhal (rice soaked in water with yogurt and seasonings) is considered a body coolant, accompanied by badi chura or saga are consumed during the months of april–june.
due to the quantity of muslim households in the city, traditional islamic and mughlai cuisines like biriyani, tandoor and sheer kurma are also popular among the denizens. due to its close proximity to paradip and mahanadi catchment area, cuttack is one of the major producer and consumer of fish. fish curry is a popular dish among odia households.
