cuttack
Civic administration[edit]
civic administration[edit]
political and municipal administration[edit]
the city of cuttack is administered by the cuttack municipal corporation. cmc was established as a municipality on 4 june 1876 and was named as a corporation on 15 august 1994. this corporation covers an area of 192.5 km. the cmc is in charge of the civic and infrastructure needs of the metropolitan city. the municipal commissioner is the chief executive officer and head of the executive arm of the municipal corporation. all executive powers are vested on the municipal commissioner who is an indian administrative service (ias) officer appointed by the state government.
cuttack city is divided into three constituencies which are represented at the state legislative assembly viz. barabati-cuttack, choudwar-cuttack and cuttack sadar. cuttack-sadar is represented by chandra sarathi behera (bjd) whereas barabati-cuttack is represented by er.mohammad moquim (inc) while choudwar-cuttack is represented by souvic biswal (bjd).
odisha high court from ravenshaw collegiate school
police and judicial administration[edit]
bhubaneswar–cuttack police commissionerate, under the control of commissioner of police, looks after the law enforcement in cuttack. cuttack has 25 police stations in the city. the headquarters of the state police are situated in cuttack. cuttack is the judicial capital of odisha as the high court is situated here. apart from it many other courts and tribunals have their offices in the city. cuttack also houses circle jail at choudwar.
utilities, ngos and charitable organisations[edit]
electricity is supplied by the state-operated central electricity supply utility of odisha, or cesu. fire services are handled by the state agency odisha fire service. drinking water is sourced from the underground wells and mahanadi river. water supply and sewerage are handled by the public health engineering organisation. state-owned bharat sanchar nigam limited, or bsnl, as well as private enterprises, among them vodafone, bharti airtel, jio, and idea cellular are the leading telephone, cell phone and internet service providers in the city.
cuttack has the largest number of ngos, charitable organisations, orphanages, old age and destitute homes than anywhere else in the state. famous ones include matrubhaban, josoda sadan, daya ashram, basundhara orphanage, odisha children's orphanage, leprosy home, regional institute of mental health, etc.
traditional cow horn sculpture
