cuttack
Historical places of interest[edit]
historical places of interest[edit]
barabati fort ruins of nine-storied palace complex
barabati fort and cantonment[edit]
barabati fort arched gate over the moat is a symbol of cuttack
the barabati fort is a 10th-century castle built by the somavamshi dynasty lineage ruler maharaja markata keshari. the ruins of the fort still remain with its moat, gate and the earthen mound of the nine-storied palace, which evokes the memories of past days. the ruins of the fort still remain on the right bank of the mahanadi, in the western part of the city with its moat, gate and the earthen mound of the nine-storied palace, which evokes the memories of past days.
chudangagarh fort[edit]
chudangagarh otherwise called sarangagarh is located near the barang junction railway station and is 8 km. south-west of cuttack city on a fair-weather road. like barabati fort this fort also played a significant role in the medieval history of orissa. chodagandadeva of ganga dynasty selected this site and built the fort for effective safeguard of his vast empire. remains of fort walls, stepped wells, dilapidated temples, tanks with stone revetments, granary house, watch towers and dressed stones are abundantly noticed within the fortified area. a ruined palace containing sixteen rooms called solapura uasa is located inside the fort. the granary of the fort is indicated at a place called chaula ghara banks. chudangagarh is now a protected monument of the archaeological survey of india, new delhi.
netaji birthplace museum[edit]
cuttack takes pride in being the birthplace of netaji subhas chandra bose, the prominent indian freedom-fighter and founder of azad hind fauj. the birthplace of netaji is situated in oriya bazar known as janakinath bhawan, behind big bazaar. the place has now been converted into a museum named netaji birth place museum. the museum showcases the original letters written by netaji along with other important materials used by netaji.
madhusudan sangrahalaya[edit]
cuttack is the birthplace of utkala gaurav madhusudan das. his former residence and workplace madhusmruti was converted to sailabala women's college in 1952. a small hall within the college premises has been preserved as madhusudan sangrahalaya, that contains works and memoirs of the great architect of odisha.
anand bhawan museum and learning centre
anand bhavan museum and learning centre[edit]
anand bhavan, the ancestral house of biju patnaik at tulsipur, was converted into a memorial museum in 2016. chief minister of odisha naveen patnaik's grandfather laxmi narayan patnaik had built anand bhavan. biju babu was born there on 5 march 1916. biju babu's iconic dakota dc-3 aircraft used to rescue indonesian prime minister sultan sjahrir is scheduled to be showcased near his ancestral home.
odisha state maritime museum[edit]
odisha state maritime museum
the odisha state maritime museum was inaugurated by the odisha chief minister shri naveen pattnaik on 1 april 2013. it has been set up at the erstwhile jobra workshop on the banks of river mahanadi near jobra. it has 10 number of galleries and an aquarium. in 1882 the east india irrigation company build an anicut (jobra anicut) (6349 ft. long) across the river mahanadi near jobra and the jobra khunti (pillar) to serve as a lighthouse to boats and cargo vessels passing through the river and the taladanda canal.
old jail complex and the freedom fighter's memorial[edit]
this location was inaugurated by hon. chief minister of odisha mr. naveen patnaik on 23 january 2010, on the occasion of netaji jayanti. it is situated at the old jail complex. the old jail complex of cuttack near ganga mandir tank and dargha bazar was a colonia-period jail cellular jail where many notable freedom fighters were imprisoned during the swaraj movement.
swaraj ashram[edit]
the swaraj ashram at telengabazar is synonymous with mahatma gandhi's relationship with odisha, cuttack in particular. the double-storey ashram, located opposite the banks of the kathajodi river. was in the thick of the non cooperation movement in the 1920s. this is where gandhi stayed during his visits to odisha. the ashram that spreads over 1100 sq ft area has been converted into a protected monument by the government of odisha. there are around 200 photographs in the ashram that captured gandhi's visit to odisha beginning with the one in 1921, the first of his seven trips to odisha's 69 sites till 1946. historians say that cuttack was the seat of the freedom movement in odisha and the swaraj ashram played a pivotal role in paving the way for swaraj movement
maratha barracks[edit]
the marhatta barracks are medieval era structures in chauliaganj, presently used as headquarters of the 6th battalion of the odisha state armed police force (osapf), were used as armoury both during the marhatta and british rule. these iconic long barracks are one of the oldest surviving buildings of odisha and are widely perceived as original remaining structures and a unique example of the synthesis of maratha and odishan architecture. rajaram pandit started the work in 1775 and it was completed by sadasiva rao in 1795. spread across a vast patch of forest land on the outskirts of the city, the place was infested by tigers, panthers, snakes and other wildlife. the forest was cleared except for some ancient trees, which are still standing tall. the domed structures were solidly built with local materials. kiln baked bricks and lime mortar was used. there were big wells in the compound and underground cells. separate stables for their horses and elephants, magazines for storing gunpowder, living quarters etc. were made. the barracks housed the artillery, cavalry and infantry forces. the marathas had as many as 2,000 soldiers in the barracks. there was a thick wall around with watchtowers, none of which now exist.
salt house[edit]
britishers had built the salt house in 1847–48 and the collectorate was functioned from this house till new building was built. river 'kathajodi' was the main transit source for the commercial commodities. the length of the buildings is 190' with 66 pillars. presently the building is used as courts of sub divisional judicial magistrates. the building had an aristocratic look with 3 guns standing as guards. unfortunately, the architecture of the building has been completely disfigured with many brickworks and structures.
lal bagh palace[edit]
situated on the bank of the kathjodi, the lal bagh palace at cuttack has a long and colourful history. this building witnessed the rise and fall of several rulers who controlled the fortune of odisha. it was constructed by the mughal subedar stationed at cuttack. subsequently, the property passed into the hands of the marathas. over the years the premises have undergone several alterations and modifications. william bruton visited cuttack in 1633, when the lal bagh palace was under construction. in 1741, saulat jung, the naib nazim, fixed his residence in the palace. the building was occupied by the naib nazims till 1751 and by the representatives of the bhonslas of nagpur from 1751 to 1803. lal bagh came into the possession of the british in 1803 when colonel harcourt's men defeated the maratha soldiers. the lal bagh palace was apparently leased out but again came into the possession of government, who sold it in january 1862, and the purchaser sold the estate along with the building to the east india irrigation company. in 1863, the building came into the possession of the government when they took over the irrigation works from the company. since 1868 the building was occupied by commissioners and sometimes by collectors. in 1896, shri r.c. dutt, the then commissioner, who was also a well-known historian, lived in this building. in a letter to his daughter, he describes the building as "the best-situated commissioner's house." the building which was still under the irrigation branch was transferred to the buildings and roads branch of the government in 1914. in 1941, shri k.c. gajapati narayan deo, maharaja of parlakimedi and premier of orissa, fixed his residence at the lal bagh palace for a time. on 18 july 1942, the lal bagh palace became the new government house. sir hawthorne lewis was the first governor to live in the lal bagh palace. this historic building, which stood witness to countless political and social upheavals during mughal, maratha and british rule in odisha, became the center of administration. the lal bagh palace continued to serve as the residence of the governor till 1960. during the tenure of shri sukthankar in 1960, the raj bhavan was shifted from cuttack to bhubaneswar. shri sukthankar generously donated the building to the indian red cross society to utilize it as a children's hospital. the government of orissa [now, odisha] took over this hospital in 1966 and made it an independent institute for post-graduate training and research. at present, the institute is known as sardar vallabhbhai patel post graduate institute of pediatrics, and is popularly known as shishu bhavan.
kanika rajbati[edit]
it is a palace built by raja bahadur rajendra narayan bhanjdeo in cuttack. once a high-profile area and favourite homestay of rajkanika rajas as well as british era guest house, this historic structure now lies in a dilapidated state.
gorakabar anglican cemetery
gora kabar cemetery[edit]
the gora kabar was set up in an area of five acres by the banks of the mahanadi on the outskirts of the city by the east india company in 1822. the presence of the english officials and their families had become significant after the occupation of cuttack in 1803. the site already had graves of a few englishmen before it was walled in and designated as a graveyard. initially it was a cemetery for all christians, but later on it was used only by the baptists.
shree gopal krishna goshala[edit]
the antiquity of this old complex is not exactly known. old timers of cuttack call it the goshala, but it was originally a dharamshala for the pilgrims of the old jagannath sadak. just 100 metres from the nayabazar chhak, on the far end of the city, it lay right by the side of the old road. this stretch of the jagannath sadak, from the mahanadi till the kathjori ghat was once a 100 feet wide road. during the monsoons, when the mahanadi was often in spate, pilgrims often had to camp for days to make the crossing; the dharamshala was built well away from the flood plain, right between the two rivers. the place was originally set up as a dharamshala by one seth jagannath halan of calcutta. it was a huge complex with rooms and halls for the pilgrims. there was a big tank and wells dug inside the complex and a large pond, which still exists. it was the largest dharamshala of the old road and could house a thousand pilgrims. there was a separate accommodation block for the sadhus and mahants who traveled on the old road. many of the pilgrims camped under the huge trees. in 1905, two benevolent marwaris of salkia in howrah district, seth bishen dayal and seth hari dayal, took over the abandoned dharamshala and transformed it into a goshala. there is a marble plaque which says that the victoria gorakhini sabha opened the goshala in the place in 1905. they made some alterations and repairs to the old building and made it into a charitable institution rendering service for old and infirm cattle.
lalitgiri as a part of pushpagiri mahavihara
lalitgiri[edit]
lalitgiri also known as naltigiri is a major buddhist mahavihara complex in the indian state of odisha comprising major stupas, 'esoteric' buddha images, and monasteries (viharas), one of the oldest sites in the region. together with the ratnagiri and udayagiri sites, lalitgiri is part of puspagiri university located on top of hills of the same names. the three complexes are known as the "diamond triangle". significant finds at this complex include buddha's relics. tantric buddhism was practiced at this site.
olasuni hill[edit]
olasuni hill stands on the border of cuttack and jajpur district, adjacent to the daitari- paradip express highway. the saint arakhita das after travelling widely, finally chose olasuni hill as his sadhana pitha. there he meditated in a cave for a long period and finally attained salvation. the hill is dotted with temples, among which the temple of goddess olasuni, the presiding deity and the tomb of saint arakhit das are famous. the sleepy olasuni hill wakes up to the delight of the devotees, on magha ekadasi every year, who throng the place in large numbers to witness the nine-day gumpha yatra. the yatra commemorates the death anniversary or shradha mahostav of the saint arakhita das who lived here 200 years ago.
apart from these odisha high court museum, odisha government press museum, odisha police museum, mahanadi river boating jetty, jobra lovers point or suicide point, etc. are some newest attractions.
parks and gardens[edit]
ocean world water park[edit]
the city has the state's only water park named ocean world. due to the strategic location of the water park being situated on the midway of cuttack and bhubaneswar, it is a popular outing location for the people of both cities.
cmc deer park[edit]
a deer park is situated beside the mahanadi ring road at madhusudan nagar, overseeing the mahanadi river. the park has about 200 deer. the park is maintained by the cmc.
recreational parks[edit]
the city is filled with numerous social parks. biju pattnaik park, birenmitra park, gouri shankar park, kathajodi river view park, khannagar park, jobra park jayprakash narayan park are some of the prominent existing parks.
nandankanan zoological park and botanical gardens[edit]
nandankanan is a 400-hectare (990-acre) zoo and botanical garden near baranga between cuttack and bhubaneswar. established in 1960, it was opened to the public in 1979 and became the first zoo in india to join world association of zoos and aquariums (waza) in 2009. it also contains a botanical garden and part of it has been declared a sanctuary. nandankanan, literally meaning the garden of heaven, is located in the environs of the chandaka forest, and includes the 134-acre (54 ha) kanjia lake.
chandaka elephant sanctuary[edit]
chandka elephant sanctuary is a wildlife reserve located in the northwestern fringe of bhubaneswar in the indian state of odisha. nestled on khurdha uplands of the eastern ghats biotic region, chandaka forest is spread over 175.79 square kilometres (67.87 sq mi) of rolling table land and small sprawling hillocks of khurdha and cuttack districts. it was designated as an elephant reserve in december 1982.
naraj peacock valley[edit]
situated at talapada village a few minutes drive from naraj bridge and hardly 15 km away from cuttack is a forest famous for herds of peacocks. 16yrs back when super-cyclone plunked odisha with its formidable appearance, 3 peacocks from chandaka reserved forest popped up to this area, where a man named panu behera, serving as a forest range caretaker for the cashew nut forest took responsibility to feed them. since then it has been more than one and half decade now and the flock has been raised to 48. without any govt support, behera has pledged to take care all of these birds till his death thereby earning the name "peacock man". a few local youngsters took over the charges of present-day peacock herd of 150 male and female.
mahanadi river boating[edit]
jetty has been constructed on mahanadi near jobra to facilitate tourists for river cruise ride to dhabaleshwar or motor boating on mahanadi. ncc has an exclusive jetty for naval cadet training.
lakes and reservoirs[edit]

anshupa lake
deojhar waterfalls, narasinghpur, cuttack[edit]
considered as the one & only waterfall in the entire district this waterfall is around 100 km from cuttack's main city & can be reached via athagada & badamba.
anshupa lake[edit]
anshupa lake is a 141-hectare horseshoe-shaped fresh water lake on the left bank of the mahanadi river. it is 40 km from the city and acts as a shelter for the migratory birds in the wintry weather season. this small lake holds a prominent position in the tourist map of odisha for its natural environment and proximity to both cuttack and bhubaneswar. some bamboo cottages are made on the top of saranda hill for tourist refreshments. boating facilities are available.
jobra barrage[edit]
jobra barrage or jobra anikut as widely called is a major source of water for the mahanadi delta region. taladanda canal, a major irrigation and flood canal in coastal area starts from here. iocl's paradip refinery has its water intake point from this barrage.
naraj and mundali reservoirs[edit]
situated at the bifurcation point of mahanadi and kathajodi rivers, it marks the westernmost tip of cuttack city. it is a major irrigation dam on kathajodi river that ensures the water level in mahanadi river and thereby preventing flood situations in cuttack. near to the naraj barrage is the mundali barrage that is the starting point of puri canal. naraj is a major railway station apart from cuttack railway station. the area surrounding naraj has many industries.
stone revetment on mahanadi[edit]
idea of embankment and fund contribution given by cuttack raksaka baimundi to maharaja markata keshari to save cuttack from flood. the king then constructed the historic embankment and named as baimundi embankment.
