darbhanga
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
railways[edit]
darbhanga junction
darbhanga junction lies on the east central railway. it is connected directly to all the major cities of india.
of the beginning of railway in darbhanga and its neighbouring areas, the imperial gazetteer of india noted:
the famine of 1874 gave a great impetus to the construction of railways, and the district is on the whole well off in the matter of communications. its southwest corner is traversed for 29 miles by the mainline of the bengal and north-western railway, and also by 25 miles of the new chord-line from hajipur to bachwara, which runs parallel to the ganges embankment from east to west. from samastipur a line runs to darbhanga town and there branches off in two directions, the first north-west to sitamarhi through kamtaul and jogiara, and the other due east to khanwa ghat on the kosi (old stream) near pratapganj. the total length of the line within the district is 146 miles. most of the earthwork for a line from sakri to jainagar on the nepal frontier was completed as relief work during the famine of 1897; and the line, which has now been opened, should tap a large grain supply from nepal.
darbhanga airport[edit]
darbhanga airport
darbhanga also has its own commercial airport which is connected with all the major cities of india.
darbhanga airport (iata: dbr, icao: ve89) is a civil enclave at the darbhanga air force station of the indian air force, 6 kilometres from darbhanga city near the nh-105 and nh-57 east-west corridor expressway which passes through darbhanga. the civil enclave is operated by the airports authority of india (aai). the foundation stone for the project was laid by chief minister nitish kumar and then civil aviation minister suresh prabhu in the presence of state civil aviation minister jayant sinha on 24 december 2018. commercial flights started on 8 november 2020.
roadways[edit]
nh 27 which is part of india's east–west highway corridor passes through darbhanga
darbhanga is connected to other parts of india by national highway 27, national highway 527b and bihar state highways 50, 56, 88 and 75. darbhanga is also connected to mehsi, madhubani and sitamarhi.
the east-west corridor expressway, which connects porbandar in gujarat to silchar in assam, passes through darbhanga.
