dehradun
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
central braille press, dehradun – the first braille press of india
the main source of economy in dehradun is its tourist places. the city's economy is enhanced by the presence of nearby national parks, mountain peaks and historical sites. dehradun has a per capita income close to $2,993 (per 2020 figures). it has witnessed a strong economic growth in the last 20 years. dehradun has experienced a commercial and information technology upswing, amplified by the establishment of software technology parks of india (stpi). and sezs (special economic zones) throughout.
the largest profession in dehradun is agriculture. staple foods are rice and dal with raita, curd and salad. dehradun is known for its lychees and for growing the world's finest basmati rice.
it hosts training institutions of national importance such as the indian military academy, indira gandhi national forest academy (ignfa), zoological survey of india (zsi). it is home to national foundations such as the ordnance factory dehradun, instruments research and development establishment (irde), defence electronics application laboratory (deal) and other defence establishments. other institutions include the indian institute of petroleum, national institute for visually handicapped, central soil and water conservation research & training institute, oil and natural gas corporation (keshav dev malviya institute of petroleum exploration, institute of drilling technology), uttarakhand space applications centre, survey of india, wadia institute of himalayan geology, forest survey of india (fsi), indian council of forestry research and education (icfre), indian institute of remote sensing, wildlife institute of india, forest research institute (fri), army cadet college and the rashtriya indian military college (rimc).
major defence production establishments include the ordnance factory dehradun, the opto electronics factory of the ordnance factories board, defence electronics application laboratory and instruments research and development establishment of the defence research and development organization which manufactures products for the indian armed forces. many of these are located in the raipur area. the ordnance factory estate is located in the middle of the mountains.
