dehradun
Government and politics[edit]
government and politics[edit]
as capital of the state of uttarakhand, dehradun houses important state government facilities such as the offices of the local governing agencies, the vidhan sabha (the home of the uttarakhand state legislature), and raj bhavan (the residence of the governor of uttarakhand). most government establishments and institutions are housed in the city.
dehradun city falls in garhwal division of uttarakhand which is headed by the divisional commissioner of dehradun, who is an indian administrative service (ias) officer of high seniority. the district magistrate and collector of dehradun report to the divisional commissioner as well. the dm is assisted by a chief development officer; five additional district magistrates for finance/revenue, city, rural administration, land acquisition and civil supply. the city is represented in two lok sabha constituencies, of tehri garhwal by mp mala rajya laxmi shah from the bjp, and garhwal represented by bjp's tirath singh rawat, elected in 2019. the city is also represented by four mlas elected from four state assembly constituencies, as per the 2008 delimitation:
civic administration[edit]

see also: dehradun municipal corporation
the municipality office of dehradun city
nagar nigam dehradun, also called dehradun municipal corporation, is the local government of the city. the corporation originated in 1998. prior to december 2003, this body was known as dehradun municipal council, and after revamping the municipality, the dehradun municipal corporation came into existence under the uttarakhand (the uttar pradesh municipal corporation act, 1959) (amendment) act, 2017.
as of 2018, the municipality covers an area of 196.48 km (75.86 sq mi) and administers a population of 803,983. in 2017, with the inclusion of 72 adjoining villages in the dmc limits, the number of wards increased from 60 to 100. as of 2020, the corporation consists of 100 wards and the elected head is the mayor who presides over a deputy mayor and 99 other corporators representing the wards. the mayor is directly elected for a period of five years and is currently sunil uniyal gama, elected in november 2018.
the municipal commissioner is the executive head of the local government institutions (the municipal corporation) in the division, in charge of infrastructure development in his division, and is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the division. as of 2020, the municipal commissioner is vinay shankar pandey while the deputy municipal commissioner is soniya pant. the corporation has the following departments: public works, property tax, health, street lights, project implementation unit, information technology and sanitation. as per the asics report 2017, dehradun municipality generates very few of its own revenues and relies primarily on grants from the state government. the municipality collects revenue from property taxes and parking fees.
other urban entities involved in civic services and city governance and management include parastatals like the mussoorie dehradun development authority (mdda), special area development authority (sada), jal sansthan, and jal nigam among others. these oversee the city's civic infrastructure which comes under dehradun urban agglomeration and covers a population of 714,223 according to the 2011 census.
police administration[edit]
the headquarters of uttarakhand police are located in dehradun. while the state is headed by the director general of police, the district is headed by deputy inspector general of police (dig) garhwal. the city's nodal police officer is the superintendent of police (sp city) who reports to the senior superintendent of police (ssp) who also holds the post of dig.
dehradun falls under the lucknow zone of the chief bureau of investigation (cbi), which is part of the central government. assistant commissioner of police (acb) dehradun, has jurisdiction over 13 districts in uttarakhand.
