dehradun
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
airway[edit]

the jolly grant airport is the main airport that serves dehradundhr b class steam locomotive put for public display outside dehradun railway station
dehradun is served by dehradun airport, also known as jolly grant airport (iata: ded, icao: vidn), which began its commercial operations in on 30 march 2008. it's 27 kilometres (17 mi) from the city center and lies in doiwala. the nearest international airport is in new delhi. over 1,325,931 passengers passed through the airport in 21–22, making it the 33th busiest airport in india. the airport is to be developed as an international airport, which has caused protests since it would require the felling of trees in the ecologically sensitive area of thano. there is also a helicopter service from dehradun to chinyalisaur a town in uttarkashi district and gauchar.
railway[edit]
dehradun railway station is the city's largest train station. part of the northern railways (nr) zone, railway station was established in year 1899 by the british, it is the last station on the northern railway line in the area. the indian railway stations development corporation (irsdc) is working on the redevelopment of existing railway stations to turn them into world-class travel hubs.
roads[edit]
dehradun lies on the national highway 7, national highway 307 which connects it to states punjab, haryana, himachal pradesh, and uttar pradesh. there are two sets of major roads in dehradun city, one along ne-sw (rajpur main road) and the other along with nw-se (raipur, kaulagarh and chakrata) directions and they, in turn, are connected to another minor road network. the road density is high in the central part of the city around the bus stand and railway station. the uttarakhand transport corporation (utc), a public sector passenger road transport corporation is a major constituent of the transport system in uttarakhand operates intracity and intercity bus service. there are also private transport operators operating approximately 3000 buses on non-nationalized routes along with a few interstate routes. other modes of travel for local inter-city transportation are public transportation buses, auto rickshaws and cycle rickshaws.
