dehradun
Civic utilities[edit]
civic utilities[edit]
water supply[edit]
dehradun city receives potable water from two primary sources- surface water and groundwater to meet its supply needs. the sources of water were mainly from kaulu khet spring, maussifall, bindal river, bijapur canal and more than 100 tubewells. it suffers from lack of sufficient ground water recharge and depleting ground water tables. the water supply of dehradun is operated and maintained by uttarakhand jal sansthan (ujs), a state agency.
solid waste management, sewerage[edit]
the sewage of dehradun is operated and maintained by uttarakhand jal sansthan (ujs) but is also selectively under the aegis of the smart city project funded by the central government. as per a report from 2015, only 25% of the city is covered by the existing sewage system. according to the smart cities annexe 2, the sewerage covers 30% of the city, and has an efficiency of 10%.
the city of dehradun generates 350 metric tons (350,000 kg; 390 short tons) of waste per day. the landfill or dumping site has since shifted from the dumping ground on sahastradhara road in 2017 to one centralized solid waste processing plant in dehradun, shishambara on the outskirts of the city which has the capacity of 600 mp per day. only 69 of the 100 wards in the city are covered by this plant and only 3% of the wards in dehradun have 100% segregation of waste at source. segregation of waste at source is lacking in the city, although the municipality spends around one crore per month on collection and transportation of solid waste. a decentralized pilot project was started in nathuwala ward with the help of local residents and an ngo called feedback foundation and has since been declared a zero waste zone.
electricity in dehradun is regulated through the uttarakhand power corporation limited (upcl), while fire services are handled by the uttarakhand fire and emergency services. state-owned bharat sanchar nigam limited, or bsnl, as well as private enterprises, among them vodafone, bharti airtel, reliance, idea cellular, and tata teleservices are the leading telephone and cell phone service providers in the city.
public health[edit]
the healthcare facilities in dehradun consist of private and public hospitals, formal and informal service providers as well as secondary and tertiary healthcare with single clinic doctors. in spite of having special status under the national health mission, the city is facing a healthcare crisis due to the shortage of medical manpower in the state and financial constraints. hospitals and medical centers in the dehradun are plagued by non-functioning equipment in the operating theatre and the insufficient number of labor rooms. hospitals in the city include the doon hospital, max super specialty hospital, shri mahant indresh hospital, himalayan hospital, uttaranchal ayurvedic hospital, combined medical institute (cmi) hospital, luthra hospital, and government hospital premnagar (managed by the state government).
