dehradun
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
statue of tara and great stupa dehra dun
after becoming the capital, there has been continuous growth in education, communication and transport. as the state capital, dehradun is home to many government institutions.
city buses are identified with blue bars. there are auto rickshaw which are often used for transportation but blamed for pollution and noise. the evening buzz of rajpur road is an attraction. the city center is easily recognized by the clock tower (ghanta ghar), a structure with four functioning clocks. the statue of san dijen placed in shanti niketan contributes to the beauty of the city. dehradun has been home to artists and writers including stephen alter, nayantara sahgal, allan sealy, ruskin bond and also to country singer bobby cash.
dehradun was home to freedom fighters whose names are engraved in gold on the clock tower. it was called "the gray city" in the initial days because ex-army officers and vips considered this place ideal for residence after retirement.
there are fairs (melas) throughout the year. notable fairs include magh mela, held on 14 january and jhanda mela in march, a fair for the sikh community, that attracts sikhs from all over india and abroad.
tourism[edit]
tourist destinations include the dehradun zoo, kalanga monument, chandrabani, himalayan gallery cum regional science centre guchhupani, forest research institute, uttara museum of contemporary art, tapovan, lakshman siddha peeth, tapkeshwar temple, santala devi temple, mindrolling monastery, prakasheshwar mahadev temple, sai mandir, central braille press and wadia institute of himalayan geology.
the tourist destinations can be divided into four or five areas: nature, sports, sanctuary, museums and institutions. the nearby hill stations are well known for their natural environment, temples for its faith dimensions, sanctuary for animal and bird lovers. hill stations include mussoorie, sahastradhara, chakrata, and dakpathar. famous temples include tapkeshwar, lakhamandal and santala devi.
hanuman idol at tapkeshwar temple       an indian monkey in malsi deer park       hanol temple       robbers cave, dehradun       front view of buddha temple dehradun uttarakhand       santala devi temple dehradun
places of interest[edit]
there are a number of small towns and tourist sites in dehradun district.
kipling trail[edit]
the kipling trail is the old walking route between dehradun and mussoorie that was named after english novelist rudyard kipling, who is believed to have walked the trail in the 1880s. it begins at shahanshahi ashram in rajpur village. the trail is being revived as nature, history and hiking enthusiasts are increasingly using the trail over driving up to the hill station.
khalanga war memorial[edit]

main article: khalanga war memorial
the battle of nalapani was the first battle of the anglo-nepalese war of 1814–1816, fought between the forces of the british east india company and nepal, then ruled by the house of gorkha. the battle took place around the nalapani fort, near dehradun, which was placed under siege by the british between 31 october and 30 november 1814.
maa bala sundari mandir[edit]
there are various temples of maa bala sundari devi situated in india and this is one such temple. the main temple is in trilokpur, himachal pradesh. this temple is situated approximately three km (1.9 mi) south-west direction of sudhowala. this great temple is situated inside a forest. gaur brahmin of sudhowala are pandits (brahman) of this temple. it is dedicated to the hindu goddess maa bala sundari, also known as bal roop of maa vaishno devi, a manifestation of the hindu mother goddess mahalakshmi. the words "maa" and "mata" are commonly used in india for "mother", and thus are often used in connection with maa bala sundari.
various modes of transportation are available from sudhowala, including ponies, electric vehicles and palkis operated by 2 or 4 persons. many pilgrims visit from the northern indian states to get the blessings of mahamaya bala sundari. a trust is also run by mandir maa bala sundari trust, sudhowala.
dehradun international cricket stadium[edit]
dehradun cricket stadium
rajiv gandhi international cricket stadium, dehradun is a multi-purpose stadium in the raipur area of dehradun, uttarakhand. it is the first international level stadium in the state.
robber's cave[edit]
robber's cave (locally known as guchhupani), is a river cave formation in himalaya, located approximately eight km (5.0 mi) from the centre of dehradun city in uttarakhand state of india. believed to be the hideout of the famous sultana daaku and his band of dacoits. the cave formation has thus been named robber's cave.
the cave is about 600 metres (2,000 ft) long, divided into two main parts. the cave has a highest fall of about 10 metres (33 ft). in the central part there is a fort wall structure which is now broken. it consists of an extremely narrow gorge formed in a conglomerate limestone area on doon valley's dehra plateau.
it is a natural cave formation where rivers flows inside the cave. the place is a tourist site and is maintained by uttarakhand state. local bus services are available up to anarwala village, from where it is a 1 km trek.
lachhiwala picnic spot[edit]
it is a popular tourist destination especially during summers. it is well known for its forest scenic beauty, man-made water pools and bird watching. it is now known as nature park.
tapkeshwar temple[edit]
it is a temple of pashupati lord shiva. it is situated beside a forest on the bank of the asan river and the main deity (shivalinga) is housed in a natural cave. according to the holy epic mahabharata, guru drona is said to have resided in this cave for a period of time. the temple's natural cave is named drona cave after him. water trickles down the ceiling of the cave and drops on the shivalinga creating a magnificent image.
dehradun zoo[edit]
formerly known as malsi deer park, the main objectives of dehradun zoo are conservation of wild animals, developing an education center and a rescue center for wild animals. it is located on the foothills of shivalik range on the mussoorie road. it is about ten km (6.2 mi) away from dehradun and 23 km (14 mi) from mussoorie.
forest research institute[edit]
forest research institute or 'fri' is an institution in the field of forest research in india. it was founded as india's first forestry school in 1878 by lt col frederick bailey frse frsgs of the royal engineers.
the institute is one of the oldest and biggest forest-based training institutes in india. the institute is known for its research work and wonderful architecture that dates to british raj. fri is affiliated to the forest research institute university and is approved by the university grants commission (ugc). the aim of the institution is to accomplish the needs of the indo-gangetic plains of punjab, haryana, chandigarh, delhi and western uttar pradesh, as well as the uttarakhand himalayas.
uttara museum of contemporary art[edit]
uttara museum of contemporary art is an art museum in dehradun dedicating multi-dimensional artworks in the memory of the kedarnath disaster, 2013 north india floods.
the museum was founded in 2017 and is uttarakhand's first art museum. it exhibits various aspects of the calamity and the folk culture of uttarakhand through paintings, sculptures, and other artworks.
regional science center[edit]
regional science center (rsc) is located within the campus of uttarakhand council of science and technology (ucost) at vigyan dham, suddhowala on the outskirts of dehradun. the uttarakhand regional science center is developed by the national council for science museum (ncsm) in collaboration with the ucost. the regional science center is a popular destination for school educational tours and hosts a science museum, planetarium, a 3d theatre, science gallery and scientific law based interactive exhibits.
lambi dehar mines[edit]
a deserted limestone mine supposed to be a haunted place is located in the mussoorie range of dehradun district.
virasat[edit]
virasat is a cultural festival that celebrates all aspects of the country's cultural heritage. the festival was held for the first time in 1995 in dehradun. it is recognised as the afro-asia's biggest folk life and heritage festival. organized by reach (rural entrepreneurship for art & cultural heritage), this week-long festival includes performances and workshops in indian folk and classical arts, literature, crafts, theatre, cinema and yoga.
virasat 2008 expanded the festival into a nationwide event.
