dehradun
History[edit]
history[edit]
main article: history of dehradun
doon valley, dehradun, 1850s
the history of the city of uttarakhand, dehradun (nicknamed "doon valley") is linked to the story of ramayana and mahabharata. it is believed that after the battle between ravana and lord rama, lord rama and his brother lakshmana visited this site. also, known as 'dronanagari' on the name of dronacharya, legendary royal guru to the kauravas and pandavas in the epic mahabharata, is believed to have been born and resided in dehradun. evidences such as ancient temples and idols have been found in the areas surrounding dehradun which have been linked to the mythology of ramayana and mahabharata. these relics and ruins are believed to be around 2000 years old. furthermore, the location, the local traditions and the literature reflect this region's links with the events of mahabharata and ramayana. even after the battle of mahabharata, the pandavas had an influence on this region as the rulers of hastinapura with the descendants of subahu ruled the region as subsidiaries. likewise, rishikesh is mentioned in the pages of history when lord vishnu answered the prayers of the saints, slaughtered the demons and handed the land to the saints. the adjoining place called chakrata has its historical impression during the time of mahabharata.
in the seventh century, this area was known as sudhanagara and was described by the chinese traveler huen tsang. sudhanagara later came to be recognized as kalsi. edicts of ashoka have been found in the region along the banks of the river yamuna in kalsi indicating the wealth and importance of the region in ancient india. in the neighboring region of haripur, ruins were discovered from the time of king rasala which also reflect the region's prosperity. before the name of dehradun was used, the place is shown on old maps as gurudwara (a map by webb, 1808) or gurudwara (a map by gerard, 1818). gerard's map names the place as "dehra or gurudwara". surrounding this original sikh temple were many small villages that are now the names of parts of the modern city.
guru ram rai darbar sahib in 1858. the construction of the present building was completed in 1707.
dehradun itself derives its name from the historical fact that baba ram rai, the eldest son of the seventh sikh guru har rai, set up his "dera" (camp) in "dun" (valley) in 1676. this 'dera dun' later on became dehradun.
the mughal emperor aurangzeb was highly impressed by the miraculous powers of charismatic ram rai. he asked the contemporary maharaja of garhwal, fateh shah to extend all possible help to ram rai. initially, a gurudwara (temple) was built in dhamawala. the construction of the present building, guru ram rai darbar sahib, was completed in 1707. there are portraits of gods, goddesses, saints, sages and religious stories on the walls. there are pictures of flowers and leaves, animals and birds, trees, similar faces with pointed noses and big eyes on the arches which are the symbol of the colour scheme of kangra-guler art and mughal art. high minarets and round pinnacles are the models of muslim architecture. the huge pond in the front measuring 230 by 80 feet (70 m × 24 m) had dried up for want of water over the years. people had been dumping rubbish; it has been renovated and revived.
princely flag of kingdom of garhwal. dehradun was part of the princely state of garhwal before becoming part of british india after the anglo-nepalese war in 1816.
dehradun was invaded by mahmud of ghazni during his campaigns into india followed by timur in 1368, rohilla chief najib ad-dawlah in 1757 and ghulam qadir in 1785. in 1806, the nepalese warlord kaji amar singh thapa under the central leadership of prime minister mukhtiyar bhimsen thapa united many of the indian territories that now fell under places such as almora, pathankot, kumaon, garhwal, sirmur, shimla, kangra and dehradun.
on the western front garhwal and parts of himachal pradesh up to punjab and on the eastern front the state of sikkim up to darjeeling became parts of nepal for a brief period until the british east india company went on the war from 1814 to 1816. the war ended with the signing of the treaty of sugowli where almost a third was ceded to british east india company. the british got dehradun in 1816 and colonized landour and mussoorie in 1827–1828.
capt john war memorial maintained by the army at dehradun
jawaharlal nehru, india's first prime minister, was quite fond of the city and often visited. he spent his last few days here before passing away in delhi in 1964. another leader from the independence movement, rash behari bose, who was one of the key organizers of the ghadar conspiracy and, later, the indian national army was based in dehradun in his early days before he was forced to move to japan in 1915 to continue the freedom struggle.
post-independence dehradun and other parts of garhwal and kumaon were merged with united provinces which was later renamed the state of uttar pradesh. in 2000, uttarakhand state (earlier called uttaranchal) was created from the northwestern districts of uttar pradesh under the uttar pradesh re-organization act 2000. dehradun was made its interim capital.
afghan connection[edit]
dehradun's afghan connection dated back to the first anglo-afghan war, after which the afghan emir dost mohammad khan (emir of afghanistan) was exiled by the british to dehra dun. he stayed in mussoorie for over 6 years. the balahissar ward under the mussoorie municipality has been named after the palace of dost mohammad. the famous dehradooni basmati was brought along by him from kunar province in afghanistan and it continues to be counted as a delicacy of the valley.
forty years later, after the second anglo-afghan war, his grandson, mohammad yaqub khan, was sent to exile to india in 1879. just like his grandfather, he chose doon valley as his abode. yakoob became the first afghan to formally settle in dehradun. the present mangla devi inter college was once the kabul palace where yakoob spent a few years of his life. the extended family and servants of the king were also relocated to dehradun.
the afghan royal family maintained a presence in dehra dun. it was the birthplace of the second to last king of afghanistan, mohammed nadir shah. two quaint palaces – the kabul palace in dehradun and bala hissar palace in mussoorie – stand testimony to this connection with afghanistan. they were built by these afghan rulers in exile in india in the early part of the 20th century and are palaces are a miniature replica of the palatial structures owned by the kings in afghanistan. the bala hissar palace has now been turned into mussoorie's wynberg allen school. doon-based heritage enthusiast ghanshyam told the times of india, "the police station at karanpur used to be the royal guard room of yakoob way back in 1879. the electrical office located at the survey chowk was the royal servant quarters."
today the descendants of the former royalty, yakub khan and his grandson sardar azim khan's family have integrated with the mainstream of dehra dun life. the doon connection was revived when zahir shah, the last king of afghanistan while undergoing treatment in new delhi during the last years of his life expressed a desire to meet his doon cousins but the meeting could not take place as the family members were away.ashraf ghani, the current president of afghanistan has mentioned that his grandmother grew up in dehra dun. "i speak of tagore because i was raised on tagore by my grandmother who lived in dehradun...," dr ghani said while talking about india's vision and the remarkable transformation. dehra dun is also being selected to be the second "home" ground of the afghan cricket team. and afghan cricket fans recall this "centuries old link" with the town.
