dehradun
Sport[edit]
sport[edit]
international day of yoga in dehradun, 2018
the high mountains and rivers of uttarakhand attract many tourists and adventure seekers. it is also a favourite destination for adventure sports, such as paragliding, sky diving, rafting and bungee jumping. the first indoor ice rink in india that meets the size requirements for ice hockey, figure skating, short track and rink bandy was built in dehradun.
as in the rest of india, cricket is popular among city youth. cricket association of uttarakhand, which regulates cricket in uttarakhand, is also based in the city. the multi-purpose rajiv gandhi international cricket stadium, which has a capacity of 20,000 as of 2016, is the first international level stadium in the state. it is home to the uttarakhand cricket team and second home to the afghanistan cricket team. a mega sports complex is situated in the raipur area of dehradun.
in sports tourism, the doon ice rink at maharana pratap sports complex, raipur is the first full-sized ice arena in india. it has hosted ice skating competitions and ice hockey tournaments, including the iihf challenge cup of asia.
since, the formation of the state in 2000, the state suffered a blow to its sports facilities as uttar pradesh had the entire infrastructure for sports. uttarakhand had hosted very few matches of ranji trophy. due to lack of infrastructure, players started moving to different states. in november 2012, former chief minister of uttarakhand vijay bahuguna laid the foundation of the stadium hoped that the stadium would bring dehradun on the international cricket map. on 16 december 2016, chief minister harish rawat inaugurated the stadium along with rajeev shukla (the ipl chairperson). the stadium has a seating capacity of 25,000 people, along with floodlights facility for conducting day-night matches. the stadium is built on a 23-acre site and was selected as the second home ground for the afghanistan cricket team in india.
some other cricket grounds are:
doon school ground rimc cricket ground abhimanyu cricket academy ground mpsc cricket ground rangers college cricket ground survey of india cricket ground doon cricket academy ground tanush cricket academy ground
