dehradun
Education[edit]
education[edit]
schools[edit]
main building of the doon school
schools in dehradun are classified as aided, unaided and government schools. these schools are affiliated with cbse, indian certificate of secondary education (icse) or cisce; except for the government schools, which are run directly by the uttarakhand board of school education and follow the syllabus prescribed by the state government. the language of instruction in schools is either english or hindi.
uttarakhand board of school education is responsible for administering courses of instructions, textbooks, and to conduct examinations for secondary school students of the state. the board was set up in 2001 and is headquartered in ramnagar.
notable private educational institutions in dehradun include  the asian school, brightlands school, cambrian hall, colonel brown cambridge school, convent of jesus and mary, the doon school, ecole globale international girls' school, marshall school, rashtriya indian military college, selaqui international school, st joseph's academy, dehradun, st. thomas' college, summer valley school, welham boys school and welham girls school, indian army public schools. several indian and international luminaries have attended these schools. in addition to these schools there are many other state board schools located in the city. since dehradun has many central government offices, there are as many as 12 kendriya vidyalayas also in the city.
higher education and research[edit]
front view of forest research institute
after completing their secondary education, students typically enrol in schools that have a higher secondary facility and are affiliated with the directorate of higher education, the icse, or the cbse. the colleges are each affiliated with a university or institution based either in uttarakhand or elsewhere in india. in recent times, dehradun has evolved as a pivot location for higher education in india. premier research institutes based in dehradun are doon university, forest research institute, dehradun institute of technology (dit), indian institute of remote sensing, indian institute of petroleum, himgiri zee university, wildlife institute of india, instruments research and development establishment and wadia institute of himalayan geology. universities located in dehradun are hemwati nandan bahuguna uttarakhand medical education university, sardar bhagwan singh university, uttaranchal university, doon university, institute of chartered financial analysts of india university, dehradun, university of petroleum and energy studies, swami rama himalayan university, graphic era university and uttarakhand technical university.
uttarakhand technical university has eight constituent institutes and approximately 132 affiliated colleges
the campus of  forest research institute which was established in the year 1906 hosts the indira gandhi national forest academy (ignfa), the staff college that trains officers selected for the indian forest service (ifs). wildlife institute of india (wii) is an autonomous institution under the ministry of environment forest and climate change, government of india which carries out wildlife research.
dehradun has four medical colleges. government doon medical college is the only government medical college located in the city.  private medical colleges include shri guru ram rai institute of medical & health sciences affiliated to hemwati nandan bahuguna uttarakhand medical education university and himalayan institute of medical sciences affiliated to swami rama himalayan university. these three medical colleges caters to the population of dehradun and nearby hilly areas.
adm block of doon university
national institute for empowerment of people with visual disabilities (niepvd) plays a key role in helping blind people. it is the first such institute in india and the first press for braille script in the country which provides education and service to the blind children. dehradun houses organizations like the latika roy foundation for people with disabilities to access education, employment, and full inclusion in the community. the ask foundation, an educational charity, is also located in dehradun.
notable scholars who were born, worked or studied in dehradun include former prime minister rajiv gandhi, scientists manju bansal & chandramukhi basu, writer william mckay aitken, poet kanwal ziai, german-british botanist dietrich brandis, footballer anirudh thapa, and dicci member rajesh saraiya.
