delhi
Transport
transport

main article: transport in delhi
air
indira gandhi international airport's immigration counter in terminal 3.
indira gandhi international airport, situated to the south-west of delhi, is the main gateway for the city's domestic and international civilian air traffic. in 2015–16, the airport handled more than 48 million passengers, making it the busiest airport in india and south asia. terminal 3, which cost ₹96.8 billion (us$1.2 billion) to construct between 2007 and 2010, handles an additional 37 million passengers annually. in 2010, igia was conferred the 4th best airport award in the world in the 15–25 million category, by airports council international. the airport was rated as the best airport in the world in the 25–40 million passengers category in 2015, by airports council international. delhi airport was awarded the best airport in central asia and best airport staff in central asia at the skytrax world airport awards 2015. hindon domestic airport in ghaziabad was inaugurated by prime minister narendra modi as the second airport for the delhi-ncr region on 8 march 2019. a second international airport open for commercial flights has been suggested either by expansion of meerut airport or construction of a new airport in greater noida. the taj international airport project in jewar has been approved by the uttar pradesh government.
the delhi flying club, established in 1928 with two de havilland moth aircraft named delhi and roshanara, was based at safdarjung airport which started operations in 1929, when it was the delhi's only airport and the second in india. the airport functioned until 2001; however, in january 2002 the government closed the airport for flying activities because of security concerns following the new york attacks in september 2001. since then, the club only carries out aircraft maintenance courses and is used for helicopter rides to indira gandhi international airport for vip including the president and the prime minister.
road

compressed natural gas red- and green buses have low floors; orange has standard. the cycle rickshaw and the auto rickshaw are commonly used in delhi for travelling short distances.
delhi has the highest road density of 2103 km/100 km in india. it is connected to other parts of india by five national highways: nh 1, nh 2, nh 8, nh 10 and nh 24. the delhi–mumbai and delhi–kolkata prongs of the golden quadrilateral start from the city. the city's road network is maintained by mcd, ndmc, delhi cantonment board, public works department (pwd) and delhi development authority.
buses are the most popular means of road transport catering to about 60% of delhi's total demand. delhi has one of india's largest bus transport systems. in 1998, the supreme court of india ruled that all public transport vehicles in delhi must be fuelled by compressed natural gas (cng) to tackle increasing vehicular pollution. the state-owned delhi transport corporation (dtc) is a major bus service provider which operates the world's largest fleet of cng-fuelled buses. in addition, cluster scheme buses are operated by delhi integrated multi-modal transit system (dimts) with the participation of private concessionaires and dtc. in december 2017, the dtc and cluster buses carried over 4.19 million passengers per day. kashmiri gate isbt, anand vihar isbt and sarai kale khan isbt are the main bus terminals for outstation buses plying to neighbouring states. delhi's rapid rate of economic development and population growth has resulted in an increasing demand for transport, creating excessive pressure on the city's transport infrastructure. to meet the transport demand, the state and union government constructed a mass rapid transit system, including the delhi metro. delhi bus rapid transit system runs between ambedkar nagar and delhi gate.
personal vehicles especially cars also form a major chunk of vehicles plying on delhi roads. as of 2007, private vehicles account for 30% of the total demand for transport. delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in india. taxis, auto rickshaws, and cycle rickshaws also ply on delhi roads in large numbers. as of 2008, the number of vehicles in the metropolitan region, delhi ncr, was 11.2 million (11.2 million). in 2008, there were 85 cars in delhi for every 1,000 of its residents. in 2017, the number of vehicles in delhi city alone crossed the ten million mark with the transport department of delhi government putting the total number of registered vehicles at 10,567,712 until 25 may of the year.
railway
a passenger train at the new delhi railway station. freight awaits pick up or transportation to other destinations.
delhi is a major junction in the indian railway network and is the headquarters of the northern railway. the main railway stations are new delhi, old delhi, hazrat nizamuddin, anand vihar, delhi sarai rohilla and delhi cantt. the delhi metro, a mass rapid transit system built and operated by delhi metro rail corporation (dmrc), serves many parts of delhi and the neighbouring cities ghaziabad, faridabad, gurgaon and noida. as of december 2021, the metro consists of ten operational lines with a total length of 348.12 km (216.31 mi) and 254 stations, and several other lines are under construction. the phase-i was built at a cost of us$2.3 billion and the phase-ii was expected to cost an additional ₹216 billion (us$2.7 billion). phase-ii has a total length of 128 km and was completed by 2010. delhi metro completed 10 years of operation on 25 december 2012. it carries millions of passengers every day. in addition to the delhi metro, a suburban railway, the delhi suburban railway exists.
metro
delhi metro is widely used in the ncr.
the delhi metro is a rapid transit system serving delhi, ghaziabad, faridabad, gurgaon and noida in the national capital region of india. delhi metro is the world's tenth-largest metro system in terms of length. delhi metro was india's second modern public transportation system. the network consists of 10 colour-coded lines serving 255 stations with a total length of 348.12 kilometres (216.31 mi). the system has a mix of underground, at-grade, and elevated stations using both broad-gauge and standard-gauge. all stations have escalators, lifts, and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains. there are 18 designated parking sites at metro stations to further encourage the use of the system. in march 2010, dmrc partnered with google india (through google transit) to provide train schedule and route information to mobile devices with google maps. it has a combination of elevated, at-grade, and underground lines, and uses both broad gauge and standard gauge rolling stock. four types of rolling stock are used: mitsubishi–rotem broad gauge, bombardier movia, mitsubishi–rotem standard gauge, and caf beasain standard gauge. the phase-i of delhi metro was built for us$2.3 billion and the phase-ii was expected to cost an additional ₹216 billion (us$2.7 billion). phase-ii has a total length of 128 km and was completed by 2010. delhi metro completed 10 years of operation on 25 december 2012. it carries millions of passengers every day.
delhi metro is being built and operated by the delhi metro rail corporation limited (dmrc), a state-owned company with equal equity participation from the government of india and the government of the national capital territory of delhi. however, the organization is under the administrative control of the ministry of urban development, government of india. besides the construction and operation of the delhi metro, dmrc is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail, monorail, and high-speed rail projects in india and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad. the delhi metro project was spearheaded by padma vibhushan e. sreedharan, the managing director of dmrc and popularly known as the "metro man" of india. he famously resigned from dmrc taking moral responsibility for a metro bridge collapse, which took five lives. sreedharan was awarded the legion of honour by the french government for his contribution to delhi metro.
