delhi
Civic administration
civic administration

see also: neighbourhoods of delhi, districts of delhi, and list of towns in national capital territory of delhi
districts of delhi
currently, the national capital territory of delhi is made up of one division, 11 districts, 33 subdivisions, 59 census towns, and 300 villages.
the national capital territory of delhi is divided into three municipalities, delhi municipality, new delhi and delhi cantonment, each with their own governance apparatus. the municipality of delhi is administered by municipal corporation of delhi (mcd) which occupies an area of 1397.3 km and is sub-divided into 12 zones, that is, centre, south, west, najafgarh, rohini, civil lines, karol bagh, sp-city, keshavpuram, narela, shahdara north and shahdara south. municipal services in new delhi, which occupies an area of 42.7 km, are provided by the new delhi municipal council and delhi cantonment is administered by a cantonment board.
between 2011 and 22 may 2022 delhi municipality was divided into three municipal corporations:
south delhi had jurisdiction over south and west delhi areas including mahipalpur, rajouri garden, badarpur, jaitpur, janakpuri, hari nagar, tilak nagar, dwarka, jungpura, greater kailash, r k puram, malviya nagar, kalkaji, ambedkar nagar and pul pehladpur. north delhi had jurisdiction over areas such as badli, rithala, bawana, kirari, mangolpuri, tri nagar, model town, sadar bazar, chandni chowk, matia mahal, karol bagh, moti nagar east delhi had jurisdiction over areas such as patparganj, kondli, laxmi nagar, seemapuri, gonda, karawal nagar, babarpur and shahadra.
delhi is home to the high court of delhi. the high court of delhi is the highest in the delhi before supreme court. the high court of delhi just like the apex court and other high courts in india is the court of record.   delhi is also home to various district court according to jurisdictions. delhi have currently seven district courts namely tis hazari court complex,  karkardooma court complex, patiala house court complex, rohini court complex, dwarka courts complex, saket court complex, and rouse avenue court  apart from the district courts delhi also have consumer courts, cbi courts, labour courts, revenue courts, army tribunals, electricity tribunals, railway tribunals, and other various tribunals situated according to appropriate jurisdictions.
for policing purposes delhi is divided into fifteen police districts which are further subdivided into 95 local police station zones. delhi currently has 180 police stations.
