delhi
Culture
culture

see also: culture of india

traditional pottery on display in dilli haatpragati maidan hosts the world book fair biennially
delhi's culture has been influenced by its lengthy history and historic association as the capital of india. although a strong punjabi influence can be seen in language, dress and cuisine brought by the large number of refugees who came following the partition in 1947 the recent migration from other parts of india has made it a melting pot. this is exemplified by many significant monuments in the city. the archaeological survey of india recognises 1,200 heritage buildings and 175 monuments as national heritage sites.
in the old city, the mughals and the turkic rulers constructed several architecturally significant buildings, such as the jama masjid—india's largest mosque built in 1656 and the red fort. three world heritage sites—the red fort, qutub minar and humayun's tomb—are located in delhi. other monuments include the india gate, the jantar mantar—an 18th-century astronomical observatory—and the purana qila—a 16th-century fortress. the laxminarayan temple, akshardham temple, gurudwara bangla sahib, the baháʼí faith's lotus temple and the iskcon temple are examples of modern architecture. raj ghat and associated memorials houses memorials of mahatma gandhi and other notable personalities. new delhi houses several government buildings and official residences reminiscent of british colonial architecture, including the rashtrapati bhavan, the secretariat, rajpath, the parliament of india and vijay chowk. safdarjung's tomb is an example of the mughal gardens style. some regal havelis (palatial residences) are in the old city. lotus temple is a baháʼí house of worship completed in 1986. notable for its flowerlike shape, it serves as the mother temple of the indian subcontinent and has become a prominent attraction in the city. the national museum and national gallery of modern art are some of the largest museums in the country. other museums in delhi include the national museum of natural history, national rail museum and national philatelic museum.
chandni chowk, a 17th-century market, is one of the most popular shopping areas in delhi for jewellery and zari saris. delhi's arts and crafts include, zardozi—an embroidery done with gold thread—and meenakari—the art of enamelling.
festivals

more than a quarter of the immigrants in delhi are from bihar and neighboring states. chhath, a festival of rural bihar is now popular in delhi.on basant panchmi eve, qawwali singers wearing yellow headbands gather at the dargah of sufi saint nizamuddin auliya to sing verses from amir khusrau.
delhi's association and geographic proximity to the capital, new delhi, has amplified the importance of national events and holidays like republic day, independence day (15 august) and gandhi jayanti. on independence day, the prime minister addresses the nation from the red fort. the republic day parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing india's cultural diversity and military strength. over the centuries, delhi has become known for its composite culture, and a festival that symbolises this is the phool walon ki sair, which takes place in september. flowers and pankhe—fans embroidered with flowers—are offered to the shrine of the 13th-century sufi saint khwaja bakhtiyar kaki and the yogmaya temple, both situated in mehrauli.
religious festivals include diwali (the festival of lights), mahavir jayanti, guru nanak's birthday, raksha bandhan, durga puja, holi, lohri, chauth, krishna janmastami, maha shivratri, eid ul-fitr, moharram and buddha jayanti. the qutub festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over india are showcased at night, with the qutub minar as a backdrop. other events such as kite flying festival, international mango festival and vasant panchami (the spring festival) are held every year in delhi. the auto expo, asia's largest auto show, is held in delhi biennially. the new delhi world book fair, held biennially at the pragati maidan, is the second-largest exhibition of books in the world. delhi is often regarded as the "book capital" of india because of high readership. india international trade fair (iitf), organised by itpo is the biggest cultural and shopping fair of delhi which takes place in november each year and is visited by more than 1.5 million people.
cuisine

main article: indian cuisine
kitchen, karim's, old delhi, a historic restaurant, estab. 1913.
as india's national capital and centuries old mughal capital, delhi influenced the food habits of its residents and is where mughlai cuisine originated. along with indian cuisine, a variety of international cuisines are popular among the residents. the dearth of food habits among the city's residents created a unique style of cooking which became popular throughout the world, with dishes such as kebab, biryani, tandoori. the city's classic dishes include butter chicken, dal makhani, shahi paneer, aloo chaat, chaat, dahi bhalla, kachori, gol gappe, samosa, chole bhature, chole kulche, gulab jamun, jalebi and lassi.
the fast living habits of delhi's people has motivated the growth of street food outlets. a trend of dining at local dhabas is popular among the residents. high-profile restaurants have gained popularity in recent years, among the popular restaurants are the karim hotel, the punjab grill and bukhara. the gali paranthe wali (the street of fried bread) is a street in chandni chowk particularly for food eateries since the 1870s. almost the entire street is occupied by fast food stalls or street vendors. it has nearly become a tradition that almost every prime minister of india has visited the street to eat paratha at least once. other indian cuisines are also available in this area even though the street specialises in north indian food.
