dhanbad
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
rail[edit]

main article: dhanbad junction

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (september 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
dhanbad has a very good rail connectivity with the other major parts of the country such as delhi, mumbai, patna, kolkata, bhagalpur, munger, gaya, chennai, ahmedabad, hyderabad, kochi, indore, bhopal, gwalior, jabalpur, jaipur, visakhapatnam jodhpur, nagpur, pune, varanasi, guwahati and bangalore etc. dhanbad railway division is the second largest revenue generator in india after mumbai rail division.
double-decker train standing on the platform of dhanbad railway station
coal train in dhanbad yard
dhanbad rail division comes under east central railway zone. grand chord rail-line passes through dhanbad junction, it connects howrah and new delhi. cic rail line starts from dhanbad and ends at singrauli in madhya pradesh. there is one more rail line passing through the district, it starts at kharagpur and ends at gomoh, this rail line comes under south eastern railway. dhanbad is connected with almost all states through rail network. each and every train through this has a stop at dhanbad. even sealdah and howrah duronto have their stoppage at dhanbad.
on 1 october 2011, india's first ac double-decker train  was flagged off to connect howrah and dhanbad. with this india joins the league of europe and north america that run multi-deck trains. as of october 2011, the train runs daily except sunday, departing from howrah at 8:30 am to arrive at dhanbad at 12:45 pm, and on return trip it departs dhanbad at 6:30 pm to arrive at howrah at 10:40 pm. it has a maximum permissible speed of 110 kilometres (68 mi)/hr with stops at bardhaman, durgapur, asansol, barakar and kumardhubi on both legs of the route. this new ac design has several features namely stainless steel body, high-speed eurofima design bogies with air springs and other safety-features.
roads[edit]
national highway 19 and national highway 18 are the major highways passing through dhanbad. nh 19 is part of  golden quadrilateral (gq) highway network; dhanbad lies in kolkata-delhi link of the golden quadrilateral network. nh19 is being converted into six lane expressway; nh 18 connects dhanbad to bokaro-jamshedpur.
national highway 2 also emerges as a connector and transport system for various purpose connecting delhi with kolkata
private and state buses are available for inter-city traveling.
air[edit]

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (september 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
dhanbad airport is used for private small aircraft and helicopters, currently there is no public air-link at the airport. the nearest public airports to dhanbad are
kazi nazrul islam airport, asansol-durgapur 85 kilometres (53 mi) deoghar airport, jharkhand 128 kilometres (79.5 mi) birsa munda airport, ranchi  140 kilometres (87 mi) gaya airport 207 kilometres (129 mi) netaji subhas chandra bose international airport, kolkata 269 kilometres (167 mi) lok nayak jayaprakash airport, patna 271 kilometres (168 mi)
