dhule
Industries and Economy of the City[edit]
industries and economy of the city[edit]
dhule is well known for purest 'milk and ghee' production, maximum cultivable land and production of groundnut, foremost in agro-based industries, leader in wind power generation.
in the sakri taluka there is the one of asia's largest solar projects near chhadvel korde village.
also there is asia's largest wind mills project run by suzlon company near chhadvel korde and nijampur villages.
dondaicha in shindkheda taluka is famous for the chilly market. there is also a starch factory here. many cottage industries are operational in the district. beedi rolling, pottery, brick making, knitting saris on handlooms, oil extraction from ground nut and sesame are few of them. wood cutting units are operated at dhule, shirpur and pimpalner.
being centrally located on about to complete delhi mumbai industrial corridor project (dmic), safexpress has established india's largest logistics park in the outskirts of dhule city on national highway no. 6.
as part of the successful development of the region under dmic, there is a need to focus on ensuring the requisite irrigation infrastructure for ensuring availability of water throughout the year.
reasons for selecting dhule- nardana investment region (dnir):
being located close to the intersection of nh-6, nh-3 and nh-211, this region enjoys advantage of excellent connectivity to ports and hinterland. with abundant supply of raw materials and human resources, this region has wide potential for setting up of manufacturing units for textile products. dhule airport is also located close to the proposed region. this region is served by the major river basin formed by tapi river
keep apart proposed dnir, snapshot of existing dhule m.i.d.c. is as under:
1) dhule industrial area:
m.i.d.c. has planned to develop an industrial area on 400.35 hect. of land.  about 278.08 hect. of land has come into possession of midc.  midc has provided all the basic infrastructure such as roads, street lights, water supply pipe lines in this area.
midc has constructed an earthen dam on motinala to fulfill the requirement of water of the industrial area. midc has provided water supply scheme of 4.50 mld capacity.  presently the consumption of the water is about 2.20 mld.  the rate of allotment of the industrial plot is rs. 100.00 per sqm. the association namely "dhule avdhan manufacturers association avadhan, dhule" has been established for the development of industries in midc dhule industrial area.
the expansion of existing midc has been proposed vide phase- ii in raver area, situated in outskirts of the city, which is having an area of more than 1600 acres (643 hectares) and currently this proposal is under consideration of state government.
it is also worthwhile to note that, planned manmad-dhule-indore railway line have also been considered in the original proposal of dmic (delhi-mumbai industrial corridor project), which will boost industrial growth in and around city.
2) nardana central government sponsored growth centre:
midc has planned to develop an industrial area on 750.09 hect. of land.  about 648.56 hect. of land has come in possession of midc.  the reservation of water for 4.38 mm3 per year has been granted by irrigation department.  midc has provided the water supply scheme for this industrial area.  this scheme includes jackwell, 600 mm dia psc raw water rising main (13.50 km.), 400 mm dia psc pure water rising main (9.50 km.) water treatment plant of 6 mld capacity & 1000 cum capacity esr.  presently midc is developing phase i having land 480 hect.  midc has completed 7.22 km. wbm roads, out of which asphalting of 2.10 km road is completed.  midc has also provided the water supply distribution pipelines. the rate of allotment of industrial plot is rs. 50.00 per sqm.
under proposed dmic, the nardana textile park is being set up 30 km from dhule city. the total area of the park will be approximately 648 hectares, on which 72 plots will be demarcated. the dhule airstrip, just 30 km away from the industrial area, will provide accessibility to the park and facilitate a quick movement of material.
