dibrugarh
Economy
economy
fields headquarters of oil india limited at duliajan
oil india ltd.
the first oil well dug during the british era was in digboi, 50 miles (80 km) from dibrugarh. today, duliajan, dikom, tengakhat and moran are the key locations for oil and gas industry in the district. oil india limited, the second public sector company in india engaged in exploration and transportation of crude oil has its field headquarters in duliajan, 50 km from dibrugarh city. the company was granted navratna status by the ministry of petroleum and natural gas, in 2010
bcpl
the assam gas cracker project, also known as brahmaputra cracker and polymer limited, was proposed as a part of implementation of assam accord signed by government of india on 15 august 1985. the assam gas cracker project was approved by the cabinet committee on economic affairs, in its meeting held on 18 april 2006, under an equity arrangement of gail (70%), oil (10%), nrl (10%) and govt. of assam (10%) with a project cost of ₹ 54.6 billion, in which the capital subsidy is ₹ 21.4 billion. the project was scheduled for completion in 60 months. however, the commissioning of the project has been pushed to december 2013, and the cost has escalated to ₹ 92.8 million. the site selected for assam gas cracker project is at lepetkata, 15 km from dibrugarh on nh-37. a joint-venture agreement was signed on 18 october 2006, and the company brahmaputra cracker and polymer limited was registered on 8 january 2007. dr. manmohan singh, hon'ble prime minister of india, laid the foundation stone of this project on 9 april 2007.
apl
assam petro-chemicals is a semi-governmental indian company with major stakes held by government of assam, oil india limited and assam industrial development corporation (aidc). the company was incorporated in 1971 and by 1976 had started production at their small methanol plant located at namrup along with formaldehyde and a few urea-formaldehyde resins like urea-formaldehyde glue and urea-formaldehyde moulding powder. post expansion in 1989 and 1998, the company expanded the methanol plant to the capacity of 100tpd (tonnes per day) and formaldehyde plant to 100tpd. the company announced in september 2017 that it would invest ₹1,337 crore (us$170 million) and expand to produce 500tpd methanol and 200tpd formalin and become the largest producer of methanol in india. the required feedstock for these plants are natural gas, urea and carbon dioxide. natural gas, supplied by oil india ltd, is used as feedstock for methanol production. urea and carbon dioxide are supplied by namrup fertilizer plant.
tea
tea
dibrugarh hosts several tea gardens dating back to the british era. the first garden was at chabua, a place 20 miles (32 km) away from dibrugarh, owned by maniram devaan. today, the headquarters of the directorate of development of small tea growers in india is functioning from dibrugarh, besides a regional office of the tea board of india headed by a deputy director of tea development (plantation) is also located in the city. the zone i of the assam branch indian tea association(abita) is located at dibrugarh.
tourism
rail, road and air connectivity coupled with the presence of large number of tourist spots in and around dibrugarh city has seen impressive growth of tourism industry in this part of india in recent part. dibrugarh has also become an important destination as well as a major transit point for tourists from both india and abroad. such tourist circuits include – dibrugarh – roing – mayudia – anini tourist circuit, dibrugarh – guwahati river cruise besides 'tea tourism' for tourists who prefer serenity and novelty to the hustle-bustle of established tourist destinations
