dibrugarh
Transportation
transportation
airways
dibrugarh airport
dibrugarh airport, which is located around 15 km from dibrugarh town at mohanbari. airlines operating from the airport are air india, indigo, vistara, spicejet and pawan hans. indigo connects dibrugarh daily with delhi via kolkata and another non-stop to delhi while in return via guwahati. spicejet connects dibrugarh daily with guwahati and kolkata. in 2013, dibrugarh airport was provided with night landing facility. commercial operation of aerobridges have also started in this airport.
railways
dibrugarh railway station
dibrugarh holds a prominent place in the history of indian railways with the first railway services of the entire north-east india starting from here. on 1 may 1882, the first train rolled down the tracks from streamerghat at dibrugarh. on 15 may 1882, it was extended up to dinjan. on 23 december that year goods train up to chabua was introduced. on 18 february 1884, at 7:20 am, the then chief commissioner of assam sir charles illiot flagged off the first passenger train from reehabari rail station (now dibrugarh town railway station) to ledo with 400 european and indian passengers. as per the centenary souvenir of the assam railways and trading company limited published in 1991, the said company, being the pioneer in building dibru–sadiya railway, described the entire history of railway development from dibrugarh. dibrugarh town and dibrugarh are two railway stations of the city and also two of the important easternmost railway stations on the map of the indian railways connected to some of the important indian cities like bangalore, chennai, kochi, trivandrum, kolkata, delhi, kanyakumari etc. through the railways network. the new dibrugarh railway station has been developed on the outskirts of the city at banipur. it lies on the lumding-dibrugarh section of tinsukia railway division. it is the biggest railway station in the entire north east spreading over 400 bighas of land and it is 2 km in length. one goods yard is also being developed for loading and unloading of goods along with a truck shed, which can accommodate 25 trucks at a time.
waterways
iwt bogibeel ghat
dibrugarh also possesses a developed waterway transportation system along and across the brahmaputra river, known as the national waterway 2 which extends from bangladesh border to sadiya. ferry services link dibrugarh with sengajan (dhemaji district), panbari (dhemaji) & oiram ghat (near jonai dhemaji). from bogibeel iwt ghat there are regular ferry services to kareng chapori & sisi mukh. moreover, luxury cruise services are also available from dibrugarh to guwahati. the cruise to dibrugarh passes through tezpur and the kaziranga national park.
