dibrugarh
Media
media
electronic media
dibrugarh has a full-fledged all india radio centre, all india radio, dibrugarh broadcasting in both am (567 khz at 529.1 metres of mw) and fm (101.30 mhz) bands airing three transmissions a day along with a 5-minute regional news bulletin at 6:00 pm every day. all india radio, dibrugarh was commissioned way back on 15 february 1968. the station has its studios located at malakhubosa in dibrugarh and the high power transmission tower located at lepetkata near the present brahmaputra cracker and polymer limited site.
doordarshan kendra, dibrugarh
as for television viewing, the second doordarshan centre of assam, telecasting programmes in assamese language, doordarshan kendra, dibrugarh was established in the city in the year 1993. earlier the kendra used to telecast assamese language programmes capsuled in guwahati beginning 20 december 1991. the programmes produced in this kendra are telecast through a high power transmitter. dibrugarh doordarshan kendra is contributing programmes to the 'dd north east' channel.
print media
dibrugarh has been a pioneer of newspaper journalism in entire eastern india with the times of assam being the first newspaper published from dibrugarh in the late nineteenth century. after four decades of publication, times of assam ceased to publish and from 1939 the assam tribune started its journey from dibrugarh, which after 7 years of publication from dibrugarh, shifted to guwahati. however, this premier english daily of the north-east india, the assam tribune is published from dibrugarh along with guwahati and the sentinel is published from dibrugarh along with four other cities of north-east india. several vernacular, as well english and bengali dailies are published from dibrugarh. assamese newspapers published from dibrugarh are asomiya pratidin, janasadharan, niyomiya barta, dainik asam, dainik pratikshan and pratibimba,[1].  jugashangkha is a bengali daily published from dibrugarh along with guwahati and silchar.
