dindigul
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
temple at dindigul fort
begampur mosque, the oldest mosque in the city, with dindigul fort in the background
dindigul is the 18th shakthi peetam known as "sri abhiraamaa peetam".
numerous temples, mosques and churches are found in dindigul.
the kalahastheeswara-gnanambika temple was built during the 14th century. the seenivasaperumal temple built in the bottom of the hill was eroded by time. by the 16th century pandyan acquired the whole chera kingdom with the support of vijayanagar king sachudevarayer. sachudevarayer, on his visit in 1538 a.d. ordered for the repair works of the temple of abirami amman and padmagirinathar. this is inferred from the script written over stone in the fort temple. muthukrisna nayak became the king of pandaya kingdom in 1602 a.d. he built the strong hill fort in 1605 to secure dindigul from invasion. he also built a fort at the bottom of the hill, which was later called pettaiwall. thirumalai nayak redressed the hill fort and he built the front hall of the kalahastheeswaraswamy temple. soundararaja perumal temple in thadikombu was erected during his reign. during his nayak's stay in dindigul, he fell into sickness and believed to have prayed rangaperumal to relieve his sickness. rani mangammal built the six hundred steps for the hill fort. during the months of january and february, a festival honoring mariamman is celebrated in this temple. it has a sri abirami amman temple, which is reconstructed. arulmigu abirami amman temple is a holy place situated in dindigul in tamil nadu, india. this is one of the important "shivasthalam" where you can find padmagiriswarar—abirami amman and kalahastheeswarar—gnanambigai sannathi's. the rock hill is called padmachala, padmagiri, lotus hill.
begumbur periya pallivasal, dindigul, thowheeth masjid, ahle hadees pallivasal, bajar masjid, mohammadiyapuram pallivasal, mandi pallivasal, madinah pallivasal, ring road pallivasal and makkah pallivasal are some of the islamic institutions in dindigul.st.
the dindigul fort is the most appreciated and widely acclaimed. the architecture of this fort has evolved through the different dynasties that ruled over dindigul. the rock fort is 900 feet tall and has a circumference of 2.75 kilometres. cannon and gunfire artillery were included in the fort during the 17th century. the people here are eloquent in different formats of arts such as- visual arts, music and dances. in dindigul, classical dance is one of the favourite hobbies of the people. apart from classical dance, classical vocal music and karnatic raag sangeet are very common amongst the people here. a number of music and dance schools in dindigul trains both young and adults on classical music and dance.
dindigul is famous for its biryani. the dindigul biryani chains are famous all over tamil nadu. dindigul biryani is a common and popular dish, and dindigul is sometimes called biryani city.
sherumalai mountain, which is the home for a very special variety of small but sweet bananas, is located in the vicinity. dindigul’s food pallet enjoys the taste of it in raw and in various snack forms. rice, sambar and rasam form the main meals of the people here.
joseph's church at the heart of the town is known for its vast space, architecture and the glass works and special artistic work all over the church. the church was built between 1866 and 1872. it is the headquarters of dindigul diocese of roman catholic churches in dindigul.
