dindigul
Education and utility services[edit]
education and utility services[edit]
st. mary's hr. sec. school is one of the oldest schools in the city, since 1850.
as of 2011, there are 19 municipal primary schools, 23 other primary schools, eight middle schools and 13 higher secondary schools in the city. there were ten other private schools within the town. there were three engineering colleges and three arts and science colleges. gandhigram rural university and mother teresa women's university are the two universities present in dindigul.
electricity supply to dindigul is regulated and distributed by the tamil nadu electricity board (tneb). the town along with its suburbs forms the dindigul electricity distribution circle. a chief distribution engineer is stationed at the regional headquarters. water supply is provided by the dindigul municipal corporation from athoor kamarajar water supply scheme (9.6 mld), peranai water supply scheme (7.5 mld) and cauvery combined water supply scheme (6-10 mld). as of 2001, the total water supply of the town in 14 mld every day. as per the municipal data for 2011, about 92 metric tonnes of solid waste were collected from dindigul every day by door-to-door collection and subsequently the source segregation and dumping was carried out by the sanitary department of the dindigul municipality. there is no underground drainage system in the town and the sewerage system for disposal of sullage is through septic tanks, open drains and public conveniences.
the municipality maintained a total of 117.0 km (72.7 mi) of storm water drains in 2011. as of 2011, the municipality maintained a total of 5,489 street lamps: 754 sodium lamps, 173 mercury vapour lamps, 4,551 tube lights and eight high mast beam lamp. the municipality operates one daily market, namely the dindigul municipal market that cater to the needs of the town and the rural areas around it.
the municipality maintains four dispensaries, five maternity homes, eight family planning centres, three siddha and one ayurvedic centre. the government district headquarters hospital is located in dindigul and has 350 beds. the town has more than five private hospitals, 35 maternity centres, 15 laboratories and one blood bank. the historic st. joseph mission hospital with a bed strength of 250 beds is one of the major hospitals in the city. for all the advanced health care systems, madurai city is the nearest destination.
the houses of the people in this city are placed very close together due to which the society here is deeply integrated and collective. the most interesting feature about the houses here is that they painted in bright yellow, orange and blue have much in common with the current colour pallet that seems to have taken over the temple facades in the region. this displays their connection with religion and how they are inspired to create a godly presence within their homes as well.
there are several noteworthy architectural constructions in dindigul, owing to its rich history and glorified past.
