dindigul
History[edit]
history[edit]

the history of dindigul is centered around the dindigul fort, located on a small rock hill near the city. dindigul was on the border of the moovendars of ancient tamilakam, the pandyas, cheras and cholas. the chera king dharmabalan is believed to have built the temples of abirami and padmagirinathar. the ancient tamil book, silappathikaram records the city as the northern border of the pandya kingdom whose capital was madurai. historian strabo mentions about the city in his 20 a.d. work and pillni, the great historian of the time described the pandya king in his works.
during the 1st century ce, the chola king karikal cholan captured the pandya kingdom and dindigul came under chola rule. during the sixth century, the pallavas took over dindigul along with most of southern india, and was ruled by them until 8th century ce when the cholas retook it. during the delhi sultanate's raids into southern india, dindigul was not attacked, and later that century the city became part of the vijayanagara empire. the commander of the vijayanagara army kampanna udayar played an important role in the war in capturing madurai which was under the madurai sultanate. in 1559 nayaks became powerful and their territory bordered with dindigul in the north. after the death of king viswanatha nayak in 1563, muthukrisna nayakka became the king of a kingdom in 1602 a.d who built the strong hill fort in 1605 a.d. he also built a fort at the bottom of the hill. muthuveerappa nayak and thirumalai nayak followed muthukrishna nayak. dindigul came to prominence once again during nayaks rule of madurai under thirumalai nayak. after his immediate unsuccessful successors, rani mangammal became the ruler of the region who ruled efficiently.
image of temple in the fort
in 1736 chanda sahib, the lieutenant of mughal empire seized power from vangaru nayak. in 1742, the mysore army under the leadership of venkatarayar conquered dindigul. he governed dindigul as a representative of maharaja of mysore. there were 18 palayams (a small region consists of few villages) during his reign and all these palayams were under dindigul semai with dindigul as capital. these palayams wanted to be independent and refused to pay taxes to venkatarayar. in 1748, venkatappa was made governor of the region in place of venkatarayar, who also failed. in 1755, the maharaja sent haider ali to dindigul to handle the situation. later haider ali became the maharaja of mysore and in 1777, he appointed purshana mirsaheb as governor of dindigul. mirsaheb strengthened the fort and the garrison around it. his wife ameer-um-nisha-begam died during her delivery and her tomb is now called begambur. in 1783 the british army, led by captain long occupied dindigul. in 1784, after an agreement between mysore and british army, dindigul was restored by mysore province. in 1788, tipu sultan, the son of haider ali, was crowned as king of dindigul. in 1790, james stewart of the british army conquered dindigul again during third war of mysore. in a pact made on 1792, tipu ceded dindigul to the british. dindigul was the first region to come under british rule in madurai district. in 1798, the british army strengthened the hill fort with cannons and built sentinel rooms in every corner. the british army, under statten stayed at dindigul fort from 1798 to 1859. after that madurai was made headquarters of the british army and dindigul was attached to it as a taluk.  dindigul was under the rule of the british until india gained independence on 15 august 1947. recently the city has been experiencing new growth and new companies are opening branches here like chennai silks, unlimited, jos allukas and tanishq.
