dindigul
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
view of the city centre from dindigul fort
according to indian census of 2001, dindigul town's urban workforce participation rate is 35.24 percent. dindigul, being the headquarters of the district, has registered growth in the secondary and tertiary sectors, with a corresponding decrease in the primary sector. major employment in the city is provided by industrial estates, hand loom, trading and commerce activities. approximately 90 percent of the workforce is employed in the tertiary sector. the district at large has only two industrial estates, with one of them located in the city. oddanchatram is one of the important towns in dindigul district. oddanchatram vegetable market (also known as gandhi market) is the largest vegetable market in tamil nadu. as of 2001, there were approximately 60 tanneries, 165 lock manufacturing units and large number of cotton spinning mills.
locks and steel safes are manufactured in dindigul and operated as a co-operative sector. locks manufactured in dindigul are sold in national and international markets and it is well known all over india for the quality of locks. dindigul locks received geographical indication on 30 august 2019. a decline in lock industry is observed in modern times and other industries like leather, handloom, and aggro opportunities have gained significance. silk, muslin and blanket manufacturing is common in dindigul and after coimbatore, the city has the second largest textile spindling capacity in the state. chinnalapatti silk, a brand of silk saree is produced out of chinnalapatti located 11 km (6.8 mi) from the city.  the climate condition of the region is conducive for horticulture and agriculture. the district at large produce non-food crops like coffee, flowers, tobacco, and eucalyptus. dindigul is the center for wholesale trading of fruits like orange, pineapple, sapota and guava, and vegetables like onion.
dindigul was an important center of trade in tobacco and manufacture of cigars during the british times. a favorite cigar of winston churchill called churut, the 'light of asia', was produced in dindigul. the tobacco industry is one of the main sources of employment for the inhabitants of dindigul. the central government has a research center for tobacco in vedasandur. this is one of the two centers in india, the other one is rajamundri. in modern times, it has the largest trading center in the state for chewing tobacco and scented betel nuts. well-known brands of scented chewing tobacco like angu vilas, roja supari etc. operate out of the city and sent to various places in the state and outside. dindigul is also one of the leading leather producers and suppliers in the state.
