durgapur
Education[edit]
education[edit]
colleges[edit]
garden of the national institute of technology, durgapur, west bengal, india
durgapur is home to national institute of technology, durgapur, an autonomous institution in eastern india of national importance. it is one of the 31 n.i.t.s in the country. n.i.t. durgapur is one of the 8 old regional engineering colleges established in 1956.
durgapur government college is the only government college not only in the home district of burdwan but also in the neighbouring districts of bankura, purulia and birbhum. it was established on 15 september 1970 and was affiliated to the university of burdwan which later got affiliated to kazi nazrul university.
the central mechanical engineering research institute (also known as csir-cmeri durgapur or cmeri durgapur) is a public engineering research and development institution in durgapur, west bengal, india. it is a constituent laboratory of the indian council of scientific and industrial research (csir). the institute is dedicated to work in the mechanical and allied engineering disciplines.
the national power training institute (also known as npti(er) and formerly known as pets, durgapur) is an institute under ministry of power, government of india which offers postgraduate education in the field of power plants. this institute is also associated with several industrial bodies for imparting training to plant personnel.
durgapur institute of advanced technology and management, dr. b.c. roy engineering college and the bengal college of engineering and technology offer engineering degrees. they are affiliated to maulana abul kalam azad university of technology (makaut), formerly known as west bengal university of technology (wbut). durgapur women's college and michael madhusudan memorial college are general degree colleges affiliated to kazi nazrul university.
schools[edit]
jawaharlal nehru with schoolchildren at durgapur
durgapur houses a large number of government aided and public schools in addition to two kendriya vidyalaya and jawahar navodaya vidyalaya (under the government of india). notable private schools include: st. michael's school, st. xavier's school,carmel convent high school, pranavananda vidyamandir and amrai high school.
