durgapur
Notable people[edit]
notable people[edit]
abhisek banerjee, former indian domestic cricketer. aishe ghosh, indian research scholar and student leader of sfi. aloke paul, recipient of the shanti swarup bhatnagar prize for science and technology, alumni of national institute of technology, durgapur, born in durgapur. ananda gopal mukhopadhyay, former politician and leader, indian national congress. bikash sinha, chairman of the board of governors of the national institute of technology, durgapur. bikramjit basu, recipient of the shanti swarup bhatnagar prize for science and technology, alumni of national institute of technology, durgapur. bimal mitra, indian bengali author and author of saheb bibi golam. dipali saha, politician, all india trinamool congress, won from sonamukhi (vidhan sabha constituency), formerly within durgapur (lok sabha constituency)). kalipada bauri, former politician who won from gangajalghati, formerly within durgapur (lok sabha constituency)) from communist party of india (marxist). kamanio chattopadhyay, recipient of the shanti swarup bhatnagar prize for science and technology, alumni of national institute of technology, durgapur. lalbihari bhattacharya, former politician who won from barjora (vidhan sabha constituency), formerly within durgapur (lok sabha constituency)) from communist party of india (marxist). mamtaz sanghamita, former member of parliament, bardhaman窶電urgapur (lok sabha constituency) belonging to all india trinamool congress mika singh, indian playback singer and live performer. mrinal banerjee, former minister of power, state of west bengal and former leader of communist party of india (marxist). munmun dutta, indian film actress. nikhil kumar banerjee, indian physician and politician belonging to all india trinamool congress. prayas ray barman, indian cricketer, youngest debutant in indian premier league. saidul haque, former member of parliament, bardhaman窶電urgapur (lok sabha constituency) belonging to communist party of india (marxist) sandip burman, tabla player and musician. sri zaheer, 12th and current dean of the carlson school of management, university of minnesota. subir chowdhury, ceo and md of jcb india. sudip chattopadhyay, indian developmental biologist, biotechnologist and the dean of research and consultancy at the national institute of technology, durgapur. sunil kumar mandal, indian politician and member of parliament, purba bardhaman, who previously won from galsi, within bardhaman窶電urgapur (lok sabha constituency), from forward bloc. s. s. ahluwalia, member of parliament, bardhaman窶電urgapur (lok sabha constituency) belonging to bhartiya janata party. swami ashokananda, disciple of swami vivekananda. tushar dutta, classical music vocalist.
