durgapur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road[edit]
durgapur bus stand outside durgapur railway station
durgapur is the preferred gateway to the districts of bankura, birbhum (bolpur, rampurhat, suri), and purulia. nh 19 (old numbering: nh 2) passes through the city jurisdiction and sh 9 originates from muchipara in the city. nh 14 (old numbering nh 60) passes through the north-western suburb of pandabeswar and finally passes through raniganj and heads away towards odisha. it happens to be one of the very few cities that have an asian highway (ah) passing directly through the city jurisdiction. the ah1 links japan with turkey, through korea, china, vietnam, cambodia, thailand, myanmar, india, bangladesh, pakistan, afghanistan, and iran.
durgapur has bus terminuses at benachity (prantika bus terminus), city center, and at railway station. within the city, private mini-buses operate from station terminus and prantika to different parts of the city and also between station and prantika, via different routes.
auto-rickshaws ply between city center, benachity, chandidas, bidhannagar, railway station and other parts of the city in a number of routes. pre-paid taxis are available in the city from station terminus. additionally, cab and auto-rickshaw services for the city are offered online.
only one bus is available for the kalyani-bansberia route and it departs from benachity at 4:40 am and from kalyani at 10 am every day.
various private buses ranging from sleepers to premium volvos are available from city center, durgapur for kolkata, asansol, barddhaman, barakar, bhubaneswar, digha and other nearby cities. durgapur is the headquarters of sbstc which provides government bus services to kolkata, haldia, digha, bankura etc. from durgapur and asansol. private buses are available for asansol, barakar, bardhaman, bolpur, bishnupur, chittaranjan, deoghar, digha, illambajar, jhargram, kalna, katwa, kharagpur, krishnanagar, medinipur, nabadwip, nalhati, purulia, rampurhat, siuri, tatanagar, tarakeswar, etc.
air[edit]
the city is home to a domestic airport, the kazi nazrul islam airport. it is india's first private-sector greenfield airport. it is located at a place called andal which is roughly 15 kilometres from durgapur's city center bus terminus. the airport has direct flights to new delhi, mumbai, chennai, bangalore and hyderabad, which are operated by indigo and spicejet. and an old dsp airport at bijra near iq city.
an air force station at panagarh (16.3 km from durgapur city centre), belonging to the indian air force, is used as a base for a c-130j hercules squadronal.
rail[edit]
durgapur is served by durgapur railway station, waria railway station and andal junction railway station. durgapur railway station is one of the most important station of eastern railways where almost all express trains give a stop, except a few long-distance trains like the howrah - new delhi rajdhani express and duronto express. it falls in the bardhaman-asansol section of eastern railways and howrah-gaya-delhi line of indian railways.
ecab service[edit]
ola, uber, ola bike, rapido bike taxi
