eluru
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
an antique museum is being set up in the city, that will preserve prehistoric tools, idols, and elements found in the archaeological excavations near the city.
notable personalities[edit]
the personalities from eluru include kommareddi suryanarayana, a rajya sabha and lok sabha member in indian parliament and indian freedom activist; murali mohan, a member of parliament and telugu film actor, producer and business executive; duvvuri subbarao, an economist and the 22nd governor of the reserve bank of india; justice muhammad shahabuddin, judge federal court of pakistan and governor east pakistan; kurma venkata reddy naidu, a lawyer, professor, justice party leader, governor and chief minister of madras presidency; chodagam ammanna raja, indian freedom movement activist and rajya sabha member; mothey vedakumari, parliamentarian and singer; v. s. ramadevi, the first woman to become chief election commissioner of india; pawan kumar, former cricketer for andhra and hyderabad.
people from film industry are l. v. prasad, film producer, actor, director, cinematographer and businessman; pasupuleti kannamba, actress, playback singer and film producer of telugu cinema; vijaya bapineedu, magazine editor, film screenwriter and director; v. n. aditya, film director and screenwriter; sekhar kammula, film director, screenwriter and producer; silk smitha, film actress; naga shaurya, film actor; shanmukha srinivas, film actor and an accomplished kuchipudi dancer.
cityscape[edit]
view of buddha statue
eluru buddha park is in the city and is notable for its 74 ft (23 m) buddha statue in the abhaya posture, in the heart of gaja vallivari cheruvu tank which was used as drinking water source for elephants in the ancient era.
kolleru lake is a very large (30,855 hectares [100 sq mi] to 90,100 hectares [300 sq mi]) but shallow fresh-water lake, about 15 km from the city. the lake is known for attracting migratory birds from northern europe and northern asia during the months of october–march and is designated as the kolleru bird sanctuary.  as of 2018, the water level has been low in recent years.
the "holy land" of israel has been replicated on the premises of fr. silvio pasquali memorial convent at duggirala on the city outskirts.
tammileru guntupalli group of buddhist monuments sultan quli mosque sanivarapupeta s.v. rangarao statue
neighbourhoods[edit]
the city has neighbourhoods including ramachandrarao pet (r.r. pet), narasimharao pet (n.r. pet), pathebada, one-town (1-town), powerpet, satrampadu, sanivarapupeta, vatluru.
