eluru
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in eluru
national highway 16 and eluru canal near eluru
public transport systems in the city and for long-distance travel include government run apsrtc buses, privately operated auto rickshaws, cabs, mini-buses etc. every day, around 4000 auto rickshaws flee on city roads. national highway 16, a part of asian highway 45 and golden quadrilateral highway network, bypasses the city and connects kolkata with chennai. gnt road, mini-bypass road, canal road and sanivarapupeta road are the major internal arterial roads. the city has a total road length of 227.09 km (141.11 mi).
nh216a , is a spur road of nh16 starts from eluru bypass near vatluru  connecting gundugolanu , bhimadole ,  pulla , kaikaram , chebrolu ,  unguturu , tadepalligudem , duvva ,  tanuku , peravali , khanadavalli , siddantham,  ravulapalem , vemagiri  , kadiyapulanka and ends at rajahmundry .
apsrtc operates its bus services from eluru old and eluru new bus stations to parts of the state vijayawada, rajahmundry , guntur, nellore, visakhapatnam , tirupati , srikakulam , tekkali palasa , tanuku , annavaram , tadepalligudem  , kovvur , kakinada , tuni ,  vizianagaram , salur , parvathipuram , palakonda kaikaluru  , bhimavaram  , palakollu , narsapuram , gudivada , machilipatnam ,  jangareddigudem , nuzvid , hanuman junction  , srisailam , narsaraopeta , ongole , and to other states (mostly hyderabad , khammam , bhadrachalam , aswaraopeta , banglore , gangavathi , raichuru). state highway 43 and state highway 44 connect eluru with sathupalli and jangareddygudem respectively.
eluru railway station is classified as an 'a–category station' in the vijayawada railway division of south coast railway zone. apart from the main station, other stations that serve the city include powerpet, denduluru and vatluru. all these stations are on the howrah-chennai main line. eluru is one of the top 100 booking stations of indian railways. nearest airport to eluru city is gannavaram airport which is 35 km from eluru city.
indian national waterway 4 (nw-4) is under development. it runs along the northern circars through kakinada, rajamahendravaram, eluru, commanur, buckingham canal, and part of the krishna and godavari rivers in south india.
