eluru
Education[edit]
education[edit]
aerial view of siddhartha school in tangellamudi
eluru plays a major role in education for urban and rural students from nearby villages. it has an average literacy rate of 83.90% with, according to the 2011 census, a total number of 155,894 who are literate. this includes, 80,434 men (88.13%) and 75,460 women (79.82%).
primary and secondary school education is provided by government, aided, and private schools, under the school education department of andhra pradesh. according to the school information report for the academic year 2016–17, the urban area has around 160 schools. these include government, residential, private, municipal, and other types of schools. there are more than 100 private schools and 49 municipal schools. there are more than 30,000 students in these schools.
instruction is in english, urdu, and telugu.
sri chintalapati varaprasada murthy raju was the founder of chintalpati satyavathi devi college (st. therisa college) and three high schools in the name of indian freedom fighters: kasturiba girls high school, balagangadhar tilak oriental for sanskrit, duggirala gopal krishnayya. moulana abdul kalam azad high school (the only school with urdu as medium of instruction in the district). the central board of secondary education, secondary school certificate, or the indian certificate of secondary education are the types of syllabus followed by schools.
the government plans to set up municipal corporation junior college in the city. eluru city has asram medical college, st joseph dental college, sir c.r. reddy degree college, sir c.r. reddy college of engineering, eluru college of engineering and technology, ramachandra college of engineering, nova college, helapuri engineering college are engineering colleges present in and around eluru.
sir c.r. reddy college, situated in eluru, has had many famous celebrity graduates. a few of them are ghattamaneni krishna, an actor in telugu cinema and also member of parliament, kota srinivasa rao, also an actor in telugu cinema and member of the legislative assembly, d subbarao, the former governor of the reserve bank of india, etc.
