eluru
History[edit]
history[edit]
map of andhra pradesh prior to independence
there were 25 inscriptions of vengi chalukyas found on these pillars of mandapam at kotadibba, (eluru fort land)
ancient history[edit]
the history of eluru dates back to the second century ce and has great prominence in the history of andhra. vengi near eluru was the capital of andhra from the second century to the twelfth century, ruled by salankayanas, vishnukudinas, and eastern chalukyas. vengi was the capital city of andhradesa for more years than any other city in andhra pradesh. eluru was part of the buddhist kingdom of vengi.
salankayanas[edit]
salankayana ruled from the third century ce to the fifth century ce. they were known as salankayana after the gotra name and were the feudatories of ikshvakus. they ruled near the vengi area, with vengi (eluru) as the capital. salankayana is another of the phantom kingdoms of andhra for indologists. their date is fixed based on samudra gupta inscription mention of hastivarman of vengi.
vishnukundina[edit]
eluru was a major city of the vishnukundinas. vishnukundin reign might be fixed between the end of the salankayana and the rise of the eastern chalukyan power in 624 ad. in the late fifth century, the salankayanas were conquered by madhavarma ii of the vishnukundinas. during the reign of madhava varma the great, they became independent and conquered coastal andhra from the salankayanas and might have shifted their capital to a place in coastal andhra.
eastern chalukyas[edit]
eastern chalukyas, or chalukyas of vengi, were a dynasty of south india whose kingdom was in the present day andhra pradesh. their capital was vengi near eluru and their dynasty lasted around 500 years from the seventh century until c. 1130 c.e., when the vengi kingdom merged with the chola empire. the vengi kingdom continued to be ruled by the eastern chalukyas (eastern chalukyan kings) under the protection of the chola empire until 1189 c.e., when the kingdom succumbed to the hoysalas and the yadavas. they had their capital originally at vengi, now pedavegi, near eluru of the west godavari district and was later changed to rajamahendravaram (rajahmundry).
13th century to 16th century[edit]
eluru was captured by the kakatiyas and then became a part of the kalinga empire until 1471. later, it fell into the hands of the gajapatis. in 1515, srikrishnadevaraya captured it. after the fall of the vijayanagara kingdom, it was taken by the sultan of golkonda, kutub shah. mohammedans built the fort at eluru from the ruins of vengi.
modern history[edit]
salabat jung, the fourth nizam of hyderabad, granted, in 1753, the region including eluru to the french east india company. but, the french were forced to transfer it to the british within a few years. during british rule, eluru was a military station and the capital of the northern circars, a division of the madras presidency. in the madras presidency, the district of rajahmundry was created in 1823. it was reorganized in 1859 and was bifurcated into godavari and machilipatnam districts. eluru was a part of machilipatnam district after the division of the northern circars. in 1859, it was included in the godavari district; later, it was made a part of the krishna district. during british rule, rajahmundry was the headquarters of the godavari district, which was further bifurcated into east godavari and west godavari districts in 1925. when the godavari district was divided, eluru became the headquarters of west godavari.
in early december 2020, a mystery illness in eluru killed one person and more than 400 were hospitalised. preliminary results indicate the cause to be water and milk contaminated by lead and nickel.
