erode
Public services[edit]
public services[edit]

main article: list of educational institutions in erode
periyar anna memorial house is located in periyar street, erode.
as of 2006, there were 46 public and private schools with four technical institutes; government engineering college, technical institute being most prominent. three types of schools operate in erode: government run schools, schools funded by the government but run by private trusts (aided schools) and schools funded completely by private trusts. schools may follow tamil nadu anglo indian school board, tamil nadu state board, matriculation or cbse syllabus. the city falls under the purview of erode education district. there are four school playgrounds in the city.
electricity supply is regulated and distributed by tamil nadu electricity board (tneb) as the city along with its suburbs forms erode electricity distribution circle. a chief distribution engineer is stationed at the regional headquarters. water supply is provided by erode municipality from river kaveri through its eight reservoirs. for 2000–01, 14 million litres of water was supplied every day for households in the city. about 110-125 metric tonnes of solid waste were processed by the sanitary department in 2011. as there is no underground drainage system, disposal of sullage is through septic tanks, open drains and public conveniences with its 192 km (119 mi) of storm water drains. thandhai periyar government general hospital serves as primary centre of healthcare. several private hospitals such as lotus hospitals, kumarasamy hospital, idhayam apollo specialty hospital, c.k hospital, maruthi medical center hospital (mmch), kovai medical center hospital (kmch), erode trust hospital, national hospital (formerly savitha hospital) serve in the area. as of 2011, municipality maintained 4,678 street lamps. the corporation operates two markets, namely the nethaji market and silambarasan kuttai market and a textile market named ekm abdul gani market in brough road.
