erode
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road[edit]
meenakshi sundaranar (brough) road, one of the arterial roads
erode maintains 102 km (63 mi) of local roads with 5 km (3.1 mi) of concrete and rest bituminous. additionally, 16.6 km (10.3 mi) of state highways is maintained by state highways department. nh 544 connecting salem – coimbatore – ernakulam, bypasses the city via bhavani, chithode, nasiyanur and perundurai and the national highway nh 381a connects vellakoil and sangagiri,  bypasses the city through pallipalayam. the tamil nadu state transport corporation has a sub-divisional headquarters at erode (jeeva) under the coimbatore division. erode central bus terminus, is the second largest main bus station complex for tamil nadu state express transport corporation. erode is well connected with the nearest cities of tiruppur and coimbatore by bus. private carriers operate long-distance buses connecting to major cities like chennai, bangalore etc. the main arterial roads include:
sh-15 connecting erode – gobichettipalayam – sathy – mettupalayam – kotagiri – ooty sh-83a connecting erode – arachalur – kangeyam – dharapuram sh-79 connecting erode – tiruchengode – rasipuram – attur sh-79a connecting erode – pallipalayam – sankagiri sh-84 connecting erode – kodumudi – karur sh-84a connecting erode – modakurichi – vellakoil – mulanur – dharapuram sh-96 connecting erode – perundurai – chennimalai – kangeyam – dharapuram
erode-junction-railway-station
rail[edit]
erode junction railway station is a major rail junction in salem division of southern railway with a diesel locomotive shed and an electric locomotive shed attached. it also serves as a hub for water filling facilities, food provisions and cleaning services for long-distance trains that run via erode. the following are the lines running from erode junction:
line no.  towards  passing through station  type / track   1  salem junction  sankagiri  broad, electrified – double track   2  coimbatore junction  tiruppur  broad, electrified – double track   3  trichy junction  karur  broad, electrified - single track
air[edit]
the nearest airport to erode is the salem airport at a distance of 84 km (52 mi) which is connected to and from chennai. the major international airport is coimbatore international airport at a distance of 91 km (57 mi) with regular flights to domestic destinations including ahmedabad, bangalore, bhubaneswar, chennai, delhi, hyderabad, kolkata, kozhikode, mumbai, pune and international destinations including sharjah and singapore. the tiruchirappali international airport is 158 km (98 mi) from erode.
