etawah
History[edit]
history[edit]
ancient era[edit]
an engraving of ruins at etawah, in the first half of the 19th century ad
it is believed that the land existed right from the bronze age in the medieval times. it once formed part of the ancient country of panchala which is said to have extended from the foot of the himalayas in the north to the river chambal in the south. this region rose into great prominence during the period of mahabharata. many local traditions are attached to the modern chakar nagar which is a tehsil nearby which most probably seems to be ekchakra mentioned in mahabharata. it was ekchakra where pandavas along with their mother kunti spent their secret abode of one year during the period of their exile. there is a belief that the city was founded by king bharat. during the fourth century a.d., guptas once again established imperial unity in india. the chinees traveler fa-hien also visited a city named ‘a-lo i.e. alvi, which has been identified with modern airwa nearly town, and spent his treat at the dragon shrine. fa-hien described it as "a city near a large forest" (atavi). there are the remains of buddhist and jain temples evidently of every ancient date in large number. in the ninth and tenth centuries, this region was under the rule of gurjara pratihara rulers. the conquest of kannauj by nagabhata ii handed pratiharas control over this region. but the place was said to be evolved as an affluent region under mihir bhoj, the pratihara king.
with the coronation of harsha as a king (in 606 ad) the city  came under the thaneshwar dynasty. hiuen tsang in his works has also dwelt upon the prosperity of this region.
medieval era[edit]
the defeat of jaichandra of kannauj in the battle of chandawer in 1193 a.d at the hand of shahab-ud-din ghori, the city passed under influence of muslim power, which by end of the century held in different degrees of subjection the whole of north india except malwa and some contiguous districts.muslim rule in etawah faced maratha invasion for short period within their rule in etawah.  however, the local history of the city during the early years of the thirteenth century is more or less the account of the settlement and emergence of certain rajput clans. the gaurs occupied part of phaphund and bidhuna near the kanpur boundary, both falling in turn to chandelas of mahoba. the chauhans occupied the western portion of the district, with extensive tracts now in mainpuri. during this period; however, some disturbance related to tax arouse in nasir-ud-din muhammad shah's rule, yet these issues were put to end by tomar ruler of gwalior in 1390. in 1400–1401 mallu iqbal khan marched towards this region and was opposed by rai sumar singh or sabir of etawah and other zamindars of the vicinity on the banks of the ab-i-siyah (kali nadi) near patiali. the opposing army of rai was defeated and chased down to the confines of etawah where they took shelter.etawah was associated with various important historical events like jaunpur campaign, reigns of  rulers like bahlol lodhi, ibrahim lodhi, babur, humayun and akbar. in the fourth year of akbar's reign, bahadur khan a younger brother of ali quli khan was granted the jagir of etawah at the instance of maham anka, the foster mother of the emperor. after this, etawah district undergone major changes during reign of rohillas and oudh government.
colonial era[edit]
the cession on november 10, 1801, the city was made over to the british government by the nawab saadat ali khan together with the rest of the lower doab and other tracts. this action was taken in return for a guarantee of protection, and by way of payment for the maintenance of the oadh local forces which were ultimately stationed at kanpur. still for some years etawah was threatened with maratha inroads, while scenes occurred with the zamindars in the earlier years of the british administration which recall the experiences of the imperial officers in the 16th century, and it was not until the zamindars of saudaus, sahson and kamait had been finally settled with in 1816 a.d.
mutiny of 1857[edit]
on december 25, 1857, a british column arrived in the city. kunwar johar singh now surrounded and blew up the etawah tahsil building from where taj khan, was resisting the british advance. on 6 january 1858 the british reoccupied etawah, but struggle was hardly crushed.
freedom struggle[edit]
in 1907 rumours were afloated in etawah that zorawar singh nigam, had organized a conspiracy to throw out the british. but on enquiry it was found baseless and a person khalil who was responsible for rumour was arrested and sentenced. in 1914–15, the city came into prominence as a centre of revolutionary activity when gendalal dixit, a teacher at auraiya nearby town, formed the shivaji samitti with object of liberating the country. gendalal dixit had also organized a group of young men called ‘matri-vedi’.
in 1920 mahatama gandhi launched his non-cooperation movement all over the country. in etawah, the response of the people to this movement was enthusiastic and wide spread. in 1920–21, the district congress committee was formed with maulana rahamat ullah as its president. in 1925, jyoti shankar dixit of etawah was arrested in connection with the kakori conspiracy case but later released. in 1928, bycott of the simen commission; followed by; the civil disobedience movement in 1930 and quit india movement 1942 were started in etawah, as in other parts of the country.
after independence of india till january, 1974, 548 freedom fighters were awarded tamra patras, i.e. copper plates containing a record of the services rendered by them or their forebears.
