etawah
Education[edit]
education[edit]
colleges[edit]
baba saheb dr. b.r.a. college of agriculture engineering & technology
chandra shekhar azad university of agriculture and technology, based in kanpur has a campus in etawah, established in 1994–95. chaudhary charan singh post graduate college is offers undergraduate and post-graduate courses in science, arts, commerce faculties. the college is affiliated to chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university. college of dairy technology, etawah, established in 2015 is a constituent college and faculty of kanpur's chandra shekhar azad university of agriculture and technology. college of fisheries science and research centre, etawah, established in 2015, is a constituent college and faculty of kanpur's chandra shekhar azad university of agriculture and technology. government girls post graduate college, etawah is government women's college offering ba, bcom and ma (hindi, sociology & economics) courses in etawah. the college is affiliated to chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university. karm kshetra post graduate college is a college offering undergraduate and post-graduate courses in science, arts, commerce faculties. the college is affiliated to chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university district institute of education and training, etawah is a b.t.c. training college. it offers 2-year b.t.c. which is also known as diploma in elementary education (d.el.ed.) outside of uttar pradesh.
schools[edit]
this article contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. please help to clean it up to meet wikipedia's quality standards. where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (october 2019)
archana memorial sgm inter college, affiliated by board of high school and intermediate education, uttar pradesh etawah . arya kenya inter college, etawah, affiliated by board of high school and intermediate education, uttar pradesh, near naurangabaad crossing, etawah. delhi public school, etawah, nh 19, etawah. epsilon institute of mathematics, saifai road, etawah government girls inter college, etawah, affiliated by board of high school and intermediate education, uttar pradesh, idgaah  road, etawah. government inter college, etawah (since 1918), affiliated by board of high school and intermediate education, uttar pradesh, station road, etawah. gyan sthali academy, katra shamsher, etawah . gyan sthali residential school, [cbse] nh-2, sarai jalal, etawah. h. m. s islamia inter college is one of the oldest schools of the city affiliated to board of secondary education, uttar pradesh. jawahar navodaya vidyalaya, samhon, etawah kendriya vidyalaya, etawah. mount litera zee school, farrukhabad road, sai city udaypur, etawah saraswati vidya mandir, etawah seven hills, ekta colony, etawah shakuntlam international school, agra-bah road, udi mod, etawah. st. mary's inter college, etawah is an english medium school affiliated to cbse, new delhi and ncert published books onwards. it has run for over 50 years. st. vivekanand senior secondary public school, alampur hauz, agra road, etawah is a residential cum day scholar english medium school affiliated to cbse. the school is under sir madanlal group of institutions (smgi). suditi global academy, nagla lallu, phulrai, post dhanua, jaswantnagar, etawah the school is affiliated to cbse suditi global academy, vicharpur, nh 19, etawah theosophical inter college, s.d. field, etawah
