etawah
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
air[edit]
city is served by saifai domestic airport, which is around 15 km from city center. the airport has only unscheduled chartered flights. the nearest domestic airport is at ganesh shankar vidyarthi airport which is 175 km. the nearest international airport is chaudhary charan singh international airport located at a distance of around 220 km.
rail[edit]
mainpuri-etawah branch railway line   legend              towards farrukhabad on kasganj-kanpur route           mainpuri           towards shikohabad on tundla-etawah-kanpur route           keerath pur           karhal           vaidhpura           etawah
etawah jn
etawah junction railway station is the main station of the city as well as of the howrah-delhi main line and guna - etawah rail line . it is a class a station of allahabad division of north central railways. it has a secondary railway line to agra via reserved sanctuary area. etawah - mainpuri line is also constructed and train is running between etawah and mainpuri. one another railway line from etawah to bindki is to be constructed. it has halt for fastest trains like kanpur new delhi shatabdi express, lucknow swarna shatabdi express and many more. etawah junction is one of the cleanest railway station of indian railways. necessary basic amenities like water taps, pay and use toilets, foot over bridges, platform shed, waiting hall, railway enquiry window, computerized reservation hall, atms, food stalls, integrated train information system, train announcement system, train display boards, platform - coach indicators, infotainment screens, wheelchair accessible ramp can be found at station. sooner, we will find escalators to the bridge at the station. the city is also served by four other railway stations viz. udi junction, sarai bhopat, ekdil and vaidhpura.
road[edit]
etawah is well-connected by roads with the rest of uttar pradesh state. etawah is the regional office of etawah region of up roadways. it has buses for all cities of uttar pradesh as well as for all neighbouring states. it has buses to delhi for every 15 minutes. national highway 19 passes through etawah, connecting it to important cities like delhi, mathura, agra, kanpur, allahabad, varanasi, gurugram, dhanbad and kolkata. there are three big cities namely gwalior, agra and kanpur, near etawah with well connected roads.
agra lucknow expressway have various cuts, from where roads connect it to city like with farrukhabad road near baralokpur, with etawah - mainpuri state highway near karhal, with nh 19 near bhadan.
within the city, auto-rickshaw and cycle rickshaw are the major forms of transport. bus services run at high frequencies. etawah city is waiting for city bus services as it was announced by upa government to run 85 city buses to connect the city and to develop a ring road around the city. city buses will be available from sai city udaypur in north to udi more in south, from sarai bhopat in the west to pilkhar in the east. it will cover 50 km (approx.) distance if starts.
