etawah
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]
bhareh ka qila, boddh sculptures, bais khwaja, national chambal sanctuary, tixi temple, jains temple, nilkanth temple, kaaliwahan temple, st. mary church, company bagh garden, st. mary garden
etawah safari park[edit]
etawah safari park
the uniqueness of etawah safari park lies in the fact that while at other such places the animals remain caged and the tourists move freely in the area. while in etawah lion safari, people will move in caged paths while the lions and other animals are seen moving freely in the jungle. the lion safari, which is mainly being developed to provide an alternate home to asiatic lions, that are now limited only to gir forests in gujarat will also feature a lion breeding centre.
national chambal sanctuary[edit]
national chambal sanctuary is spread over the agra and etawah districts, and a total of 290 different species of migratory and resident birds have been identified in the region so far. winter is the best time to visit the sanctuary. a boat ride in its tranquil waters during this time is an exhilarating experience with spectacular sightings of the big reptiles basking along the 180 km sparkling sand stretches in the morning sun. but the main draw of the sanctuary are the flamingoes that arrive here in november and stay until may. the rudy shelduck also arrives a little earlier in september and stays here until may. the indian skimmers have huge colonies in the sanctuary and breed prolifically here.
sarsai nawar wetland[edit]
sarsai nawar wetland is a ramsar enlisted site wetland, en route to saman wildlife sanctuary, in etawah district of uttar pradesh. it comprises two small lakes that attract sarus cranes, white ibis and other water birds in large numbers. it has a large population of the threatened species of sarus cranes, the world's tallest flying birds. ten sarus crane pairs breed here regularly, which is more than twice the number of breeding pairs in the bird sanctuary of bharatpur in rajasthan. in winters, almost more than 40,000 migratory birds from northern arc visit sarsai nawar wetland.
agra-etawah cycle highway[edit]
cycle highway
agra-etawah cycle highway in uttar pradesh now has asia's first cycle highway. a first-of-its-kind project, the 207-km-long cycle highway runs between etawah and agra and was declared open on saturday, 27 november 2016. the track begins from the lion safari in etawah. on its way to agra are tourist destinations like naugava ka quila, raja bhoj ki haveli, and bateshwarnath temple. it ends at the eastern gate of the taj mahal in agra.
