faridabad
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]
badkhal lake[edit]
dried badkhal lake

main article: badkhal lake
badkhal lake was located in badkhal village, 8 km from delhi border. the lake fringed by aravalli hills was a man-made embankment which has now dried up. the lake complex, spread over 40 acres, had come up in 1969. in june 2015, haryana government decided to revive the badkhal lake here to once again attract tourists.
surajkund tourist complex and international crafts fair[edit]

main article: surajkund
situated at a distance of around 8 km from south delhi. it is a 10th-century water reservoir which believed to be built by tomar king surajpal. place is known for its annual fair "surajkund international crafts mela". 2015 edition of fair was visited by 1.2 million visitors including 160,000 foreigners with more than 20 countries participating in fair. the suraj kund lake. d2i.in. retrieved on 2012-01-10. here is surrounded by rock cut steps.
2016 edition of surajkund international crafts mela was the 30th edition and people's republic of china will be participating in the fair. participation of the china will be the part of agreement signed between india and china in 2014 to celebrate year 2016 as "year of china in india".
in 2021, the international crafts fair or surajkund mela, as it commonly called scheduled from 1 to 15 february was cancelled for the first time in 34 years amid covid-19 fears.
anangpur dam[edit]

main article: anagpur dam
surajkund dam downstream side
the anagpur dam is located close to the anagpur village (also called arangpur) in faridabad district, about 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) away from surajkund. this unique indian hydraulic engineering structure was built during the reign of king anangpal of the tomar dynasty in the 8th century. it is approachable by road from delhi from the delhi – mathura road. the ruins of the fortifications found in anangpur village establish by an inference that it was built by anangpal as part of the lal kot that was developed as the first city of delhi in the 8th century.
raja nahar singh palace[edit]

main article: raja nahar singh palace
raja nahar singh palace is located in ballabhgarh. now haryana tourism manages the palace as heritage property.it is owned by the tewatia family, the inheritors. the palace is now a motel-cum-restaurant.
baba farid's tomb[edit]
the tomb is located in old faridabad. baba farid was a popular sufi sant. the tomb contains 2 gigantic doors and the graves of baba farid and his son.[1]
prehistoric stone age site[edit]

main article: mangar bani
archaeologists discovered cave paintings and tools from the paleolithic period in the mangar bani hill forest, which is on the outskirts of faridabad. the cave paintings are estimated to be one lac years old. these are believed to be the largest in the indian subcontinent and possibly the world's oldest.
recreation[edit]
faridabad and various shopping malls including srs mall in sector 12, crown interiors mall in sector 37, crown plaza in sector 15 a, parasnath mall along with several others. the city has a good network of parks in each sector with some of the major parks like town park in sector 12 which also accommodates one of the largest flag of india. omaxe world street is the recent addition to the malls of greater faridabad.
