faridabad
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
the faridabad small industries association claims that faridabad and gurgaon districts account for almost 56% of the income tax collected in haryana. faridabad has been selected as one of the hundred indian cities to be developed as a smart city under pm narendra modi's flagship smart cities mission. it has started growing as another technology hub in haryana nurturing startups and innovation.
faridabad is the largest exporter of henna (mehandi) in india. according to the faridabad henna manufacturing association, the sale of henna from faridabad is worth an estimated ₹250 crore (us$31 million)–₹300 crore (us$38 million) annually.
many directorates of different union government ministries are headquartered in faridabad including central ground water board, department of plant quarantine and central insecticide lab, and union government offices from haryana including the commissioner of central excise within department of revenue, government of india, department of explosives, and department of labour. institute such as national council for cement and building materials, a research and development institute under the ministry of commerce, and industry has its head office in faridabad.
the apex central training institute of the department of revenue, government of india, national academy of customs excise & narcotics is located at sector 29. the national power training institute, an autonomous body under ministry of power, government of india has a corporate office in faridabad. the city also hosts the national institute of financial management, which serves as training academy for accounting and financial services.
nhpc corporate office, faridabad
also headquartered here is nhpc limited which is a central psu under the ministry of power, government of india, and the largest hydro-power company in india.
an office of geological survey of india is also located in the nit-5 area of the city.
faridabad is the industrial capital of haryana. as of 2013, out of a total of 11,665 registered working factories in haryana, 2,499 were in faridabad which was followed by gurgaon with 2,116 factories. according to a study, the growth of faridabad has been declining in the last 2 decades, the share of faridabad in investment is less than 1% and 93% of investment is in the paper industry. the industrial contribution of faridabad to haryana's revenue was declined from 29% to 22% in 2012–13.
faridabad is home to large-scale companies like escorts limited, india yamaha motor pvt. ltd., havells india limited, jcb india limited, indian oil (r&d), larsen & toubro (l&t), whirlpool india ltd., abb group, goodyear india ltd., bata india ltd and eicher tractor ltd. and beebay kidswear eyewear e-tailer lenskart and healthcare startup lybrate have their headquarters in faridabad. more than 5,000 units of auto parts producers are based in faridabad. lakhani armaan group has set up manufacturing facilities at faridabad (haryana).
