firozabad
History[edit]
history[edit]
the city lies in the cultural region of braj and was a part of the surasena mahajanapada during the vedic age. it was subsequently ruled by the bigger kingdoms including the mauryas, guptas, scythians, kushans, indo-greeks, harsha before falling into the hands of  brahmin peshwa ,rajput rulers.
before the foundation of modern firozabad, the main city in the area was at chandwar, on the left bank of the yamuna a short distance southwest of firozabad. chandwar was a stronghold of the chauhan rajputs from an early date, which was founded by a ruler named chandrasen according to tradition. chandwar was conquered several times by the delhi sultanate, but its chauhan rulers seem to have repeatedly asserted their independence over a period of several centuries. one tradition holds that the final defeat of the king jayachandra by muhammad of ghor took place here, at the battle of chandwar. according to family traditions of the bhadaurias, another conquest of chandwar happened in 1246, which may be corroborated by the records kept by the sultanate, which mention the capture of an unnamed hindu stronghold in that same year. then, after the delhi sultan khizr khan came to power in 1414, his general taj ul-mulk received submission from "the infidels of chandwar" and then, in 1420, he sacked and looted chandwar as punishment of some sort. in 1452, chandwar was the site of a major battle between the delhi and jaunpur sultanates, which led to a three-year truce between the two empires.
the modern city of firozabad was founded c. 1566, when raja todar mal was returning from a pilgrimage to gaya and stopped at the village of asafabad (just southeast of modern firozabad). the villagers insulted him, and when the emperor akbar heard of this, he sent the eunuch firoz khwaja to demolish the town and build a new one. the city was built on lands belonging to several neighboring villages, including akbarabad, sukhmalpur, muhammadpur-gajmalpur, rasulpur, and pempur-raipur, and it was named firozabad in honor of its founder. firoz khwaja's tomb, built of white marble, is by the road to agra.
mr. peter, a businessman working for the dutch east india company visited firozabad on 9 august 1632, and found the town in good condition. it is written in the gazetteer of agra and mathura that in 1596 faraz was upgraded to a pargana. faraz was bestowed to nawab sadulla khan as jagir, in the regime of shahjahan. jahangir ruled here from 1605 to 1627. etawah, budaun, mainpuri, faraz were under first class mansabdar of emperor farrukhsiar. baji rao i looted firozabad and etmadpur in 1737 in the regime of mohammad shah. jats of mahawan attacked faujdar hakim kajim ali bahadur jang at firozabad and killed him on 9 may 1739. jats ruled firozabad for 30 years. gajuddin, hidayat vaksh son of alamgir second his nephew and mirza baba the son in law, came to firozabad. mirza nabab khan stayed here till 1782. in the end of the 18th century, firozabad was ruled by himmat bahadur with co-operation of marathas. the french army chief of marathas, d. wayan, established an ordnance factory in november 1794. mr. thomas traving also mentioned this fact in his book travels in india. marathas appointed his subedar lakwadads here who made a fort near old tehsil, known at present as garie.
general lek and general vellajally attacked firozabad in 1802. in the beginning of british regime firozabad was in etawah district but after some time it was attached to aligarh district. when sadabad was created as a new district in 1832, firozabad was attached to it. later on, in 1833 firozabad was attached to agra district. in 1847, the business of lac was flourishing at firozabad.
in 1857, zamindar of firozabad with local public took active parts in freedom struggle. urdu poet munir shikohabadi was sentenced to kala pani by the british east india company. people of this city took part in "khilafat movement", "quit india movement", and "namak satyagrah" and went to the jail during these national movements. in 1929, father of nation mahatma gandhi, in 1935 khan abdul ghaffar khan, in 1937 pandit jawahar lal nehru and in 1940 subhas chandra bose visited pandit banarasi das chaturvedi, a two time member of parliament - said to be the father of hindi journalism and the recipient of padma bushan. firozabad district was finally established on 5 february 1989. in 2015 it became a nagar nigam.
