gangtok
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
gangtok cable car       the teesta river runs along the national highway 31a connecting gangtok to siliguri.       national highway 31a by the night.
road[edit]
taxis are the most widely available public transport within gangtok. most of the residents stay within a few kilometres of the town centre and many have their own vehicles such as two-wheelers and cars. the share of personal vehicles and taxis combined is 98% of gangtok's total vehicles, a high percentage when compared to other indian cities. city buses comprise less than one per cent of vehicles. those travelling longer distances generally make use of share-jeeps, a kind of public taxis. four wheel drives are used to easily navigate the steep slopes of the roads. the 1 km (0.6 mi) long cable car with three stops connects lower gangtok suburbs with sikkim legislative assembly in central gangtok and the upper suburbs.
gangtok is connected to the rest of india by an all-weather metalled highway, national highway 10, earlier known as national highway 31a, which links gangtok to siliguri, located 114 km (71 mi) away in the neighbouring state of west bengal. the highway also provides a link to the neighbouring hill station towns of darjeeling and kalimpong, which are the nearest urban areas. regular jeep, van and bus services link these towns to gangtok. gangtok is a linear city that has developed along the arterial roads, especially national highway 31a. most of the road length in gangtok is of two lane undivided carriageway with footpath on one side of the road and drain on the other. the steep gradient of the different road stretches coupled with a spiral road configuration constrain the smooth flow of vehicular as well as pedestrian traffic.
rail[edit]
the nearest railhead connected to the rest of india is new jalpaiguri junction railway station in siliguri, 124 km (77 mi) from gangtok via nh10. work has begun on a broad-gauge railway link from sevoke in west bengal to rangpo in sikkim, which is planned for extension to gangtok.
air[edit]
runway at pakyong airport, the first greenfield airport to be constructed in northeast india.
pakyong airport is spread over 400 ha (990 acres) at pakyong, about 35 km (22 mi) south of gangtok. at 1,400 m (4,500 ft), it is one of the five highest airports in india, and also the first greenfield airport to be constructed in the northeastern region of india, the 100th operational airport in india, and the only airport in the state of sikkim.
the airport was inaugurated by india's prime minister narendra modi on 24 september 2018 and the first commercial flights from the airport began on 4 october 2018 between pakyong and kolkata.
