gangtok
History[edit]
history[edit]
see also: history of sikkim
like the rest of sikkim, not much is known about the early history of gangtok. the earliest records date from the construction of the hermitic gangtok monastery in 1716. gangtok remained a small hamlet until the construction of the enchey monastery in 1840 made it a pilgrimage centre. it became the capital of what was left of sikkim after an english conquest in the mid-19th century in response to a hostage crisis. after the defeat of the tibetans by the british, gangtok became a major stopover in the trade between tibet and british india at the end of the 19th century. most of the roads and the telegraph in the area were built during this time.
in 1894, thutob namgyal, the sikkimese monarch under british rule, shifted the capital from tumlong to gangtok, increasing the city's importance. a new grand palace along with other state buildings was built in the new capital. following india's independence in 1947, sikkim became a nation-state with gangtok as its capital. sikkim came under the suzerainty of india, with the condition that it would retain its independence, by the treaty signed between the chogyal and the then indian prime minister jawaharlal nehru. this pact gave the indians control of external affairs on behalf of sikkimese. trade between india and tibet flourished through the nathula and jelepla passes, benefiting gangtok. trade declined with the chinese crackdown in tibet in 1959 and the passes were sealed after the sino-indian war in 1962. the nathula pass was finally opened for limited trade in 2006, fuelling hopes of economic boom.
in 1975, after years of political uncertainty and struggle, including riots, the monarchy was abrogated and sikkim became india's twenty-second state, with gangtok as its capital after a referendum. gangtok has witnessed annual landslides, resulting in loss of life and damage to property. the largest disaster occurred in june 1997, when 38 were killed and hundreds of buildings were destroyed.
