gangtok
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
the namgyal institute of tibetology museum displays rare lepcha tapestries, masks and buddhist statues.       view of downtown gangtok city from crown prince tenzing kunzang namgyal walkway.       rumtek monastery, located on the outskirts of gangtokone, is one of buddhism's holiest monasteries.
apart from the major religious festivals of dashain, tihar, christmas, holi etc., the diverse ethnic populace of the town celebrates several local festivals. the lepchas and bhutias celebrate new year in january, while tibetans celebrate the new year (losar) with "devil dance" in january–february. the maghe sankranti, ram navami are some of the important nepalese festivals. chotrul duchen, buddha jayanti, the birthday of the dalai lama, loosong, bhumchu, saga dawa, lhabab duechen and drupka teshi are some other festivals, some distinct to local culture and others shared with the rest of india, nepal, bhutan and tibet.
a popular food in gangtok is the momo, a steamed dumpling containing pork, beef and vegetables cooked in a doughy wrapping and served with watery soup. wai-wai is a packaged snack consisting of noodles which are eaten either dry or in soup form. a form of noodle called thukpa, served in soup form is also popular in gangtok. other noodle-based foods such as the chowmein, thenthuk, fakthu, gyathuk and wonton are available. other traditional sikkimese cuisine include shah-phaley (sikkimese patties with spiced minced meat in a crisp samosa-like case) and gack-ko soup. restaurants offer a wide variety of traditional indian, continental and chinese cuisines to cater to the tourists. churpee, a kind of hard cheese made from cow's or yak's milk is sometimes chewed. chhang is a local frothy millet beer traditionally served in bamboo tankards and drunk through bamboo or cane straws.
football (soccer), cricket and archery are the most popular sports in gangtok. the paljor stadium, which hosts football matches, is the sole sporting ground in the city. thangka—a notable handicraft—is an elaborately hand-painted religious scroll in brilliant colours drawn on fabric hung in a monastery or a family altar and occasionally carried by monks in ceremonial processions. chhaams are vividly costumed monastic dances performed on ceremonial and festive occasions, especially in the monasteries during the tibetan new year.
city institutions[edit]
temple of the maharajas, gangtok. 1938.       the himalayan black bear is seen here in the himalayan zoological park.
a centre of buddhist learning and culture, gangtok's most notable buddhist institutions are the enchey monastery, the do-drul chorten stupa complex and the rumtek monastery. the enchey monastery is the city's oldest monastery and is the seat of the nyingma order. the two-hundred-year-old baroque monastery houses images of gods, goddesses, and other religious artefacts. in the month of january, the chaam, or masked dance, is performed with great fanfare. the do-drul chorten is a stupa which was constructed in 1945 by trulshik rimpoché, head of the nyingma order of tibetan buddhism. inside this stupa are complete set of relics, holy books, and mantras. surrounding the edifice are 108 mani lhakor, or prayer wheels. the complex also houses a religious school.
the rumtek monastery on the outskirts of the town is one of buddhism's most sacred monasteries. the monastery is the seat of the kagyu order, one of the major tibetan sects, and houses some of the world's most sacred and rare tibetan buddhist scriptures and religious objects in its reliquary. constructed in the 1960s, the building is modelled after a similar monastery in lhasa, tibet. rumtek was the focus of international media attention in 2000 after the seventeenth karmapa, one of the four holiest lamas, fled lhasa and sought refuge in the monastery.
the namgyal institute of tibetology, better known as the tibetology museum, houses a huge collection of masks, buddhist scriptures, statues, and tapestries. it has over two hundred buddhist icons, and is a centre of study of buddhist philosophy. the thakurbari temple, located in the heart of the city, established in 1935 on a prime piece of land donated by the then maharaja of sikkim, is one of the oldest and best-known hindu temples in the city. the ganesh tok and the hanuman tok, dedicated to the hindu gods ganpati and hanuman and housing important hindu deities, are located in the upper reaches of the city. the himalayan zoological park exhibits the fauna of the himalayas in their natural habitats. the zoo features the himalayan black bear, red pandas, the barking deer, the snow leopard, the leopard cat, tibetan wolf, masked palm civet and the spotted deer, amongst the others. jawaharlal nehru botanical gardens, near rumtek, houses many species of orchid and as many as fifty different species of tree, including many oaks.
