gangtok
Utility services[edit]
utility services[edit]
electricity is supplied by the power department of the government of sikkim. gangtok has a nearly uninterrupted electricity supply due to sikkim's numerous hydroelectric power stations. the rural roads around gangtok are maintained by the border roads organisation, a division of the indian army. several roads in gangtok are reported to be in a poor condition, whereas building construction activities continue almost unrestrained in this city lacking proper land infrastructure. most households are supplied by the central water system maintained and operated by the phed. the main source of phed water supply is the rateychu river, located about 16 km (9.9 mi) from the city, at an altitude of 2,621 m (8,599 ft). its water treatment plant is located at selep. the river rateychu is snow-fed and has perennial streams. since there is no habitation in the catchment area except for a small army settlement, there is little environmental degradation and the water is of very good quality. 40 seasonal local springs are used by the rural management and development department of sikkim government to supply water to outlying rural areas.
around 40% of the population has access to sewers. however, only the toilet waste is connected to the sewer while sullage is discharged into the drains. without a proper sanitation system, the practice of disposing sewage through septic tanks and directly discharging into jhoras and open drains is prevalent. the entire city drains into the two rivers, ranikhola and roro chu, through numerous small streams and jhoras. ranikhola and roro chu rivers confluence with teesta river, the major source of drinking water to the population downstream. the densely populated urban area of gangtok does not have a combined drainage system to drain out the stormwater and wastewater from the buildings. the estimated solid waste generated in gangtok city is approximately 45 tonnes. only around 40% of this is collected by udhd, while the remainder is indiscriminately thrown into jhora, streets and valleys. the collected waste is disposed in a dump located about 20 km (12 mi) from the city. there is no waste collection from inaccessible areas where vehicles cannot reach, nor does any system of collection of waste exist in the adjoining rural areas. the city is under a statewide ban on the use of polythene bags.
