gaya-india
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
pilgrimage[edit]
the city of gaya is a holy place of hinduism, with a great number of hindu deities represented in the engravings, paintings and carvings of its shrines. of particular importance are the sites in the city associated with vishnu, in particular the phalgu river and the shrine vishnupad mandir, or vishnupada, which is marked by a large footprint of lord vishnu engraved in a basalt block. gaya is the location at which rama, with sita and lakshmana, offered pind-daan for his father, dasharatha. gaya has since remained a site of key importance for the performance of the pind-daan ritual.
gaya is considered to be one of the most ideal places to perform the śrāddha. (a śrāddha is the hindu ritual that one performs to pay homage to one's ancestors, especially to one's dead parents). as per hindu belief system, it is believed that a person goes to hell if he dies in the following circumstances - if he meets an accidental death, if he dies without his consecrations being performed, or if he is killed by a wild animal. but, if śrāddha of that person are performed at gaya then the soul of such a man will get rid of the tortures of the hell and will go to heaven. performing śrāddha here is of great importance as it helps one to get rid of pitra rinna i.e. debts towards one's ancestors (male forefathers).
nearby bodh gaya ("buddha gaya"), so named to distinguish it from the hindu town centre of gaya, is one of the four holiest sites of buddhism and the site where the buddha attained enlightenment.
world heritage site at bodh gaya[edit]
the mahabodhi temple complex at bodh gaya was listed as a world heritage site by the world heritage committee of the united nations educational, scientific and cultural organization (unesco) at its 26th session, on 26 june 2002.
the 50-metre-high (160 ft) mahabodhi temple central to the complex was first built by the emperor ashoka in the 3rd century bce. the main part of the present structure dates from the 5th–6th centuries ce. it is one of the earliest and best-preserved buddhist temples built entirely of brick dating from the later gupta period. the bodhi tree (ficus religiosa), the most important of the sacred places within the complex, is reputedly a descendant of the original tree under which siddhārtha gautama attained enlightenment and became the buddha. marking this seminal moment, bodh gaya is one of the four holiest pilgrimage sites of buddhism, with lumbini, sarnath and kushinagar.
the various structures on the site have undergone a number of restorations over the centuries. ongoing maintenance and management is required to protect the complex which, as a major pilgrimage site, is under pressure due to large numbers of visitors. the site is under the responsibility of the state government of bihar, and is managed by the bodhgaya temple management committee (btmc) and advisory board under the bodh gaya temple act, 1949.
