gaya-india
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
local transport[edit]
there are many city buses and taxis providing services across the city and bodh gaya. tangas, auto rickshaws, and cycle rickshaws also ply the city and bodh gaya. the main bus stands are government bus stand, sikaria more bus stand, gaurkashni bus stand (manpur), and delha bus stand. local transport is reliable, and auto rickshaws are available for various destinations in the city. the gaya–patna railway line plays a major role in transporting people from the town to the state capital.
roadways[edit]
gaya has a road network providing good connectivity with the state of bihar and other parts of the country. regular direct bus services run from gaya to patna, bhagalpur, munger, nalanda, rajgir, varanasi, ranchi, jamshedpur, hazaribagh, durgapur, asansol, kolkata and dhanbad. in 2011, a/c mercedes-benz luxury services were introduced by bihar state road transport corporation for muzaffarpur, patna, munger, bhagalpur, motihari, hazaribagh, koderma, and ramgarh.
the grand trunk road from kolkata to delhi passes from "dobhi & barachatti"some 30 km (19 mi) from gaya. this road, known as national highway 2 before 2010, is now called national highway 19. it connects gaya to patna, dhanbad, ranchi, jamshedpur, bokaro, rourkela, durgapur, kolkata (495 km), varanasi (252 km), allahabad, kanpur, delhi, amritsar, and to the pakistani cities of lahore and peshawar. gaya is connected to patna (105 km) by national highway 22 (formerly nh 83), and to nawada, rajgir (78 km) and bihar sharif by nh 120. construction work began in 2014 on the road from patna to dobhi via gaya and gaya to bihar sharif to create a four-lane highway with additional road and bridge infrastructure. completion of the project, originally due in april 2018, has been delayed.
railways[edit]
gaya junction
gaya is connected to the rest of india by roads, rail and airways. the grand chord section of the indian railways passes through gaya. gaya junction railway station railway station is a major junction station serving the city. gaya junction has been redeveloped as model railway station recently and houses all the major facilities like waiting rooms, computerized reservation facility, food plaza, dormitory, retiring rooms, cafeteria, bookshop, etc. gaya falls under the jurisdiction of the mughalsarai railway division of the east central railway zone. the grand chord rail line that connects howrah and new delhi passes through gaya. it lies between mughalsarai junction on the delhi side and dhanbad junction on the howrah side. it is located at  wikiminiatlas24°48′13″n 84°59′57″e﻿ / ﻿24.80361°n 84.99917°e﻿ / 24.80361; 84.99917. it has an elevation of 117 metres (384 ft).
airways[edit]
main article: gaya airport
situated between gaya (7 km) and bodh gaya (11 km), gaya airport is one of two operating international airports in the states of bihar and jharkhand. it is the second-busiest airport in bihar, after patna's jay prakash narayan airport. gaya airport mainly operates seasonal flights for buddhist pilgrims to bodh gaya from colombo, sri lanka; bangkok, thailand; singapore, and paro, bhutan. there are also regular domestic flights to varanasi, kolkata and delhi. the airports authority of india has plans to develop gaya airport as a stand-by to the netaji subhash chandra bose international airport in kolkata. gaya airport also serves as the only place of bihar from where hajj pilgrims take direct flight to makkah and madina in saudi arabia.
