giridih
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
giridih is connected by road and rail link.
rail[edit]

main article: giridih station
giridih railway station
giridih railway station (grd) is connected to madhupur junction (mdp) located 38  km to the east by a single broad gauge railway line. there is a single passenger train which runs five times a day between the two stations and takes about an hour to reach giridih. giridih is under the administration of the asansol division of the eastern railway zone of indian railways.
new giridih railway station (ngrh) lies to the north of giridih city in gadi. it became operational after the railway line between koderma junction (kqr) and maheshmunda (mmd) was completed, and is under the administration of the dhanbad division of the eastern central railway zone. presently train is ferrying once between koderma and maheshmunda and once between koderma and madhupur via new giridih.
parasnath railway station (pnme), on the howrah-delhi grand chord line, is 48 km from giridih towards south-west in isri and is under the administration of the dhanbad division of the eastern central railway zone.
a new rail line is proposed between new giridih and parasnath via madhuban to cater to the needs of locals and jain tourists coming to madhuban, parasnath. there are other proposals as well to connect new giridih with dhanbad junction via tundi and govindpur, and with jhajha via bengabad, chakai and sono.
road[edit]
the nh 19 (old nh 2)/grand trunk road passes through giridih district but away from the city.
giridih has a bus terminus in the centre of the town. the bus stand is divided into platforms for private buses. a government bus terminus is just adjacent to the main bus terminus.  there are regular bus services from the city to other parts in the district. bus service to ranchi, dhanbad, bokaro, hazaribagh, deoghar, jamshedpur, durgapur, kolkata, howrah, asansol, and patna is available.
air[edit]
boro aerodrome is an airstrip at the district headquarters of giridih. giridih is well connected to some of the popular airports of bihar, jharkhand and west bengal and they are :
deoghar airport, deoghar 71 kilometres (44 mi) kazi nazrul islam airport, durgapur 140 kilometres (87 mi) birsa munda airport, ranchi  155 kilometres (96 mi) gaya airport 169 kilometres (105 mi) lok nayak jayaprakash airport, patna 223 kilometres (139 mi) netaji subhas chandra bose international airport, kolkata 309 kilometres (192 mi)
