giridih
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

see also: economy of jamshedpur and economy of bokaro
it has a growing economy. this town used to bustle with economic activity in the period from the 1960s to 1980s when the mineral mica processing and export community reaped tremendous gains through exports to the ussr. however, since the decline of the ussr and its split into twelve cis countries, the industry has slowly declined and is currently ailing.
on the southern side of giridih, in beniadih, are the coal mines of central coalfields limited, a subsidiary of coal india limited (a maharatna and the world's largest coal miner). it is the largest industry in the giridih district and major contributor to the economy of the town. central coalfields limited itself is a miniratna.
the data processing center of data processing division (dpd) of national sample survey office (nsso) provides complete it solution from sample selection, software development to processing and tabulation of data canvassed through various socio-economic surveys of national sample survey organisation.
mica business also contribute a lot in the trade data, mainly mica is exported to china, europe, japan, taiwan, us the total value of mica exports is us$ 100 million, the leading mica exporters are jalan mica exports, ratan mica exports, jai mica, mount hill, chandauri mica syndicate etc.
in 2006 the indian government named giridh one of the country's 250 most backward districts (out of a total of 640). it is one of the 21 districts in jharkhand currently receiving funds from the backward regions grant fund programme (brgf).
presently, there are more than a dozen sponge iron and rolling mill factories in giridih. the name of few are mongia steel, sribir, siscon, baba, salasar, sriram, lal steel, saluja gold, gouri shanker etc.
there is an industrial area adjacent to the city, which is full of small, medium and large factories, these units provide employment to the locals and also to people from different parts of the country. these are namely mongia steel, saluja steel & power, and shivam group of companies.
however, pollution remains a critical issue in the surroundings of the industrial area which needs to be addressed by municipal corporation of giridih, chamber of industries & commerce and other authorities.
