giridih
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]
giridih has several religious and scenic tourist spots, including the following:
jal mandir, shikharji
sri sammeta shikharji (hindi: श्री सम्मेत शिखरजी), also known as the parasnath hills, with the highest mountain peak in jharkhand, 4480 feet above sea level, is a major jain pilgrimage destination and one of the most sacred places for jains in the world. according to jain belief, twenty of the twenty-four tirthankaras (teachers of the jains), (including parshanath) attained moksha (nirvana) from this place. rajdah dham, sabalpur, उत्तरवाहिनी गंगा (प्रकृति की अनुपम भेंट ) also known as rajdaha, is a temple of lord shiva. it is situated approximately 60 km giridih and 5 km from suriya. (near nimatand sabalpur). it is situated on the bank of the barakar river. langta baba samadhi sthal this is located in kharagdiha, about 30 km north west of the town on road towards jamua.  langta baba is revered both by the hindus and the muslims alike. people offer chadar to his samadhi as a ritual, and it is believed the wish made here by a true devotee always get fulfilled. usri falls 13 km from town, on the tundi road, it is a picnic spot. the usri river falls a 40 feet steep gorge in three separate streams. the place is surrounded by dense forest of parasnath hills. khandoli dam located 7 km north-east of giridih headquarters towards bengabad block, is a scenic water reservoir and a dam. the place has been developed as a tourism attraction. it has water-related adventure sports and bird-watching. a number of other amusement facilities are available there including boating, rock-climbing, parasailing and kayaking. sri kabir gyan mandir in sihodih, some 2 km from giridih headquarters, founded in 1985, a motivational institution is headed by sadguru maa gyan which spreads the message of sant kabir and sanatan dharma. it has a sacred temple guru govind dham with an idol of sant kabir and lord vishnu. it also has kabir gyan darshan with worth to watch murals and paintings based on life of sant kabir, vedas, morality and paintings of saints of india. surya mandir is located in mirzaganj, 33 km from giridih town. it is built in the middle of a lake in the shape of a lotus flower. pilgrims can visit here while returning from langta baba samadhi. the temple has been declared monument of national importance and is maintained by archaeological survey of india.
