gulbarga
History[edit]
history[edit]
asuf gunj, kalaburagi in 1880
the history of kalaburagi dates to the sixth century. the rashtrakutas gained control over the region, but the chalukyas regained their domain within a short period and reigned supreme for over 200 years. the kalyani kalachuris who succeeded them ruled until the 12th century. around the end of the 12th century, the yadavas of devagiri and the hoysalas of dwarasamadra destroyed the supremacy of the chalukyas and kalachuris of kalyani. around the same period, the kakatiya kings of warangal came into prominence and the present kalaburagi and raichur districts formed part of their domain. the kakatiya power was subdued in 1308 ad and the entire deccan, including the district of kalaburagi, passed under the control of the delhi sultanate.
the revolt of the officers appointed from delhi resulted in the founding of the bahmani sultanate in 1347 ce by ala-ud-din bahman shah, who chose kalaburagi (hasanabad) to be the capital. when the bahmani sultanate came to an end in 1527, the kingdom broke up into five independent deccan sultanates, bijapur, bidar, berar, ahmednagar, and golconda. the present kalaburagi district came partly under the sultanate of bidar and partly under the sultanate of bijapur. the last of these sultanates, golconda, finally fell to aurangzeb in 1687.
with the conquest of the deccan by aurangzeb in the 17th century, kalaburagi passed under the mughal empire. in the early part of the 18th century, with the decline of the mughal empire, nizam-ul-mulk, asaf jah i, one of aurangzeb's generals, formed the kingdom of hyderabad, in which a major part of the kalaburagi area was also included. in 1948, hyderabad state became a part of the indian union, and in 1956, excluding two talukas which were annexed to andhra pradesh, kalaburagi district became part of the new mysore state.
gulbarga (urdu) (city of flowers and gardens) was renamed kalaburagi (kannada) (kal-means stone in kannada, bur means thorns in kannada the whole name represents "the land of stones and thorns") effective 1 november 2014.
