guntur
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
ntr bus station
guntur junction railway station
national highway-16 near guntur
the local transport preferred by the commuters include, privately operated auto rickshaws, cabs, mini-buses etc., and government run apsrtc buses in specified routes. every day, close to one lakh people travel by different modes of transport. auto rickshaws operating on a sharing basis are the cheapest form of transport for the students and the working population.
ntr bus station handles more than 2000 buses every day, which arrive from different districts of the state. a new mini bus station built in the premises of ntr bus station is being used to run buses towards vijayawada to ease the congestion in main bus station. gmc is developing e-bus bay centres in the city for the convenience of commuters.
the rail vikas bhavan at pattabhipuram in the city is the headquarters of guntur railway division. guntur junction, nallapadu and new guntur railway stations of the city provide rail transport. while, namburu, perecherla and pedakakani halt railway stations serve as satellite stations to the city commuters. the guntur railway station operates memu and local trains for the commuting population, including thousands of university students.
there had been a proposal to build a no frills airport for the city. the airport located at gannavaram currently serves some of the air travel needs for the city commuters.
the city has a total road length of 893.00 km (554.88 mi). the mahatma gandhi inner ring road is an arterial road with a stretch of 6.34 km (3.94 mi), that encircles the city with its start and end points on nh 16. the other arterial city roads include, the grand trunk road, jkc college road, lakshmipuram road, pattabhipuram road and palakaluru road etc. the city is connected to major destinations by national highways, state highways and district roads. national highway 16 passes on the eastern side of the city, which is also a part of asian highway 45 and golden quadrilateral. the national highway nh167a and state highway 2 connect the city with macherla and hyderabad. national highway nh544d connects guntur city with anantapur and towards bengaluru by nh44. a new expressway is proposed connecting the city to rayalaseema region with faster access. state highway 48 connects the city with seashore and beaches through  bapatla and chirala. the guntur–amaravati, guntur– nandivelugu, guntur-tenali. and guntur-parchoor roads are the district roads connecting their respective destinations.
