guntur
Education and research[edit]
education and research[edit]
guntur agricultural university campus
the primary and secondary school education is imparted by government, aided and private schools, under the school education department of the state. as per the school information report for the academic year 2015–16, the city limits (including the merged villages) have more than one lakh students enrolled in over 400 schools. the central board of secondary education, secondary school certificate or the indian certificate of secondary education are the different types of syllabi followed by different schools. the medium of instruction followed by schools are telugu, english and urdu. the public library system is supported by the government with the central library located at arundalpet.
government colleges and institutions include, guntur medical college, government junior college for girls. there exists one residential college under aprjc, ten private aided, two co-operative and many private unaided colleges. hindu college, a.c college are some of the older institutes in the city. jkc college, rvr & jc college of engineering, tellakula jalayya polisetty somasundaram college (tjps college), government college for women and st. joseph's college of education for women are the autonomous colleges approved under universities grant commission scheme. the aiims in mangalagiri is a central medical institute near the city region. the agricultural university at lam village is administered from gorantla area of the city. the acharya nagarjuna university, a state university located at namburu, affiliates many colleges and institutes of the city. research centres related to different fields such as, regional agmark laboratory, regional station of central tobacco research institute of indian council of agricultural research are also present. the city hosts many national, state level conferences and expos on many topics like economy, agriculture, technology etc. the first agri infotech expo for the state is being held at the university campus at guntur to make use of the latest technologies and adhering to traditional organic farming practices.
information technology centres are setup in and around the city institutes to facilitate it company employees with 'it work from town centres'. the centres are equipped with better network speed, uninterrupted power supply.
