guntur
Governance[edit]
governance[edit]
the collectorate complex of guntur
civic administration and politics[edit]
guntur municipality is one of the oldest municipalities with more than 150 years of history. it was constituted with 25,000 population in 1866 and later got upgraded to third grade municipality in 1891, first grade in 1917, special grade in 1952 and then to selection grade in 1960. in 1994, it was finally made as municipal corporation and the first ever municipal election was conducted in 1995. in the year 2012, the city limits were expanded by merging ten surrounding villages into the guntur municipal corporation. there are a total 57 revenue wards in the corporation. the present municipal commissioner is shri nishant kumar ias. during the financial year 2018–19, the corporation had a budget of ₹1,004 crore (equivalent to ₹11 billion or us$140 million in 2020). recently the corporation topped the charts in property tax collections in the state.
in the indian general elections, guntur lok sabha constituency is one among the 25 constituencies in the state to represent the lok sabha. while, guntur east and guntur west are the two assembly constituencies from 175 assembly segments, representing the state assembly.
state offices[edit]
as part of the andhra pradesh capital region, the city hosts many state offices and agencies such as andhra pradesh forest department, agricultural marketing department etc. the state's crime investigative agency (crime investigation dept.) is known as cid. its regional office is located within the city and its headquarters located in the guntur urban district in mangalari.
law and order[edit]
city court
guntur urban and rural police offices oversee the law and order for the city and the rural areas surrounding it. the guntur urban police is under consideration to be upgraded as guntur police commissionerate. the ncc group guntur is the national cadet corps of the armed forces. it is located at syamalanagar. the city also hosts one of the indian army recruitment and training centres. the city has a new regional passport centre to cater the citizens of the district and state.
the high court was in guntur after the separation from the erstwhile madras state, which was later moved to hyderabad after the formation of andhra pradesh. after the bifurcation of the state a new high court is set up in the capital region of the district. the ap state judicial preview offices are located at nagarampalem.
