guntur
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
the city residents are referred as gunturians. traditional drama and theatrical events also have their presence in the city. there are many festivals for literature, poetry, kavi-sammelan in the city. guntur has many auditoriums such as venkateswara vignana mandiram, annamaiah kalavedika etc. to conduct these cultural events. new auditoriums like kala-pranganam are coming up in guntur. the city observes many festivals such as rama navami, hanuman jayanthi, maha shivaratri, vinayaka chavithi, vijaya dasami, deepawali, holi, ugadi, eid, krishnastami, christmas, karthika pournami.
cuisine[edit]
the south indian breakfast varieties such as idli, dosa, puri, vada etc., are preferred mostly. the red chilli biryani is one of the native dish from the area. guntur sannam, a chilli variety was registered as one of the geographical indication from andhra pradesh under the geographical indications of goods (registration and protection) act, 1999.
the city has many hotels, restaurants for dine in many areas. also there are lot of street food vendors in every corner of the city. guntur has many places for lodging and boarding including 5 star hotels. gongura pachadi is one of the famous and authentic pickle originated from the city of guntur.
cityscape[edit]
a residential area
archaeological museum
the major commercial and residential areas in the city include the arundelpet, lakshmipuram and brodipet. koretapadu, navabharath nagar, pattabhipuram, syamala nagar and vidya nagar etc., are some of the other areas in the city. autonagar, gorantla, pedapalakaluru, nallapadu, budampadu, chowdavaram etc. are some of the other areas of the city.
the city has many parks, museums, temples, nature conservation sites, forts, resorts and caves. the jinnah tower is one of the iconic structure on mahatma gandhi road, one of the important centres of the city. there are seventeen parks in the city with some of them maintained by the municipal corporation. larger city parks like nagara-vanam are being developed on the outskirts of the city. there are many places to visit nearby the city such as uppalapadu bird sanctuary, kondaveedu fort etc. there are many festivals and events in the region such as beach festivals, hill festivals attract the city residents during various festival seasons. the closest beach to the city region is surya lanka.

