gurgaon
Transport
transport
roadways
toll gate of the delhi gurgaon expressway.
the major highway that links gurgaon is national highway 48, the road that runs from delhi to mumbai. while the 27.7-kilometre (17.2 mi) delhi-gurgaon border-kherki dhaula stretch has been developed as the delhi–gurgaon expressway, the rest is expanded to six lanes.
railways
intercity rail
gurgaon railway station is operated by northern railway of indian railways. the rail station forms a part of the larger indian railways network. along with that, gurgaon has tajnagar railway station, dhankot railway station, ghari harsaru railway junction and farrukhnagar railway station, patli railway station. under modernisation of railway stations, indian railways is modernising four railway stations in gurgaon. gurgaon railway station, ghari harsaru railway junction and farrukhnagar railway station will be developed and modernised with modern amenities and international facilities.
delhi metro
the gurgaon rapid metro serves the city of gurgaon.
huda city centre metro station on the yellow line of delhi metro.
there are five stations served by delhi metro rail corporation ltd. located on the yellow line, which are huda city centre, iffco chowk, mg road, sikanderpur and guru droncharya.
rapid metro
the rapid metro has eleven stations in gurgaon, with an interchange with yellow line of delhi metro at sikanderpur metro station. the rapid metro became operational in november 2013 and currently covers a distance of 11.7 kilometres (7.3 mi). one more phase of the project is in the pipeline and would take the total number of subway stations in the city to 16. an estimated 33,000 people ride the rapid metro every day, which provides an exclusive elevated transit service with three coach trains that run in a loop.
airways
airport
gurgaon is served by delhi's indira gandhi international airport, which is located just outside of gurgaon city limits near national highway 8.
transit systems
public transit
in november 2013, gurgaon launched an ciclovia-inspired initiative known as raahgiri day—in which a corridor of streets are closed to motor vehicle traffic on sunday mornings to encourage the use of non-motorized transport and participation in outdoor leisure activities. gurgaon was the first city in india to implement such a program, followed by new delhi, and later noida.
gurgaon is also expected to get india's first pod taxis.
