guwahati
History[edit]
history[edit]
ancient history[edit]
epigraphic sources place the capital of kamarupa kingdom in guwahati. the 10th-12th century kalika purana mention that kamrup was inhabited by kiratas. as per legends, the tank dighalipukhuri located in the heart of the city was dug by king bhagadatta of kamrup on the occasion of the wedding of his daughter bhanumati with duryodhan. located within guwahati is the shakti temple of goddess kamakhya in nilachal hill (an important seat of tantric and vajrayana buddhism), the ancient and unique astrological temple navagraha in chitrachal hill, and archaeological remains in basistha and other archaeological locations of mythological importance.
a view of kamakhya temple
the ambari excavations trace the time period of the city of guwahati between the 2nd century bce and the 1st century ce, in the shunga-kushana period of indian history. descriptions by xuanzang (hiuen tsang) reveal that during the reign of the varman king bhaskaravarman (7th century ce), the city stretched for about 30 li (15 km or 9.3 mi). archaeological evidence by excavations in ambari, and excavated brick walls and houses discovered during construction of the present cotton college's auditorium suggest the city was of economic and strategic importance until the 9th–11th century ce.
medieval history[edit]
statue of lachit borphukan
forces of muhammad bin bakhtiyar khalji suffered a disastrous defeat in the hands of raja prithu in kamrup during tibetan expedition. the entire army of bakhtiyar khalji was defeated by native forces, which forced him to retreat.
the city was the seat of the borphukan, the civil-military authority of the lower assam region appointed by the ahom kings. the borphukan's residence was in the present fancy bazaar area, and his council-hall, called dopdar, was about 300 yards (270 m) to the west of the bharalu stream. the majindar baruah, the personal secretary of the borphukan, had his residence in the present-day deputy commissioner's residence.
the mughals invaded assam seventeen times, but were defeated by the ahoms in the battle of itakhuli and the battle of saraighat in outskirts of guwahati.there was an ancient boatyard in dighalipukhuri, probably used by the ahoms in medieval times.
medieval constructions include temples, ramparts, and other structures in the city.
colonial history[edit]
during the 17th century guwahati was taken and retaken by muslims and ahoms eight times in fifty years, but in 1681 it became the residence of the ahom governor of lower assam, and in 1786 the capital of the ahom raja. on the cession of assam to the british in 1826 it was made the seat of the british administration of assam, and so continued till 1874, when the headquarters were removed to shillong in the khasi hills.
modern history[edit]
this section needs expansion with: late colonial history and transition to independence. you can help by adding to it.  (december 2022)
in 1972,  due to separation of meghalaya from assam, the capital of assam was moved to dispur, a neighbourhood in guwahati from the erstwhile capital of shillong.
