guwahati
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
pandu, located on the banks of the brahmaputra at the western part of the city, is an ancient urban area that acted as the chief military base for the ahoms against external invasions. due to extensive fortification ('gorh') surrounding pandu, it acts as a natural river harbor and is formally called gar-pandu. pandu port falls under dhubri-sadiya national waterway-2 and is an important terminal and transit point for goods and cargo as well as passenger and tourist vessels. construction of both low-level and high-level jetty of fixed terminal, capable of handling container vessels, has been completed and has further enhanced revenue generation for the city.
multi level car parking facility operated by assam state transport corporation (astc) situated at paltanbazar, guwahati
the manufacturing sector in guwahati contributes a substantial share to the economy of the city. petroleum manufacturing is an important economic activity in the city. the guwahati refinery is the most important manufacturing industry in the city. located at noonmati, the refinery was set up by the indian oil corporation limited as the first public sector refinery of india as well as the refinery of indian oil since 1962. it was built with an initial crude processing capacity of 0.75 million tonnes per year at the time of its commission which was gradually increased to 1.0 million tonnes per year. it produces various products and supplies them to the other northeast states and also beyond to siliguri through the guwahati-siliguri pipeline. the various products produced by the refinery include liquefied petroleum gas (lpg), kerosene oil, turbine fuel (aviation use), motor spirit, high-speed motor diesel, light diesel oil, and raw petroleum coke. there is also an lpg bottling plant in the city.
tea manufacturing and processing is another important activity of guwahati. assam is one of the highest tea-producing areas in the world, contributing 80% of india's export and 55% of the country's total tea production. so high is the production of tea in assam that it is the biggest industry of the state. the headquarters of the assam branch indian tea association (abita) is located at guwahati. the guwahati tea auction centre (gtac), located adjacent to the capital complex at dispur, is the world's largest ctc tea auction center and the second largest in terms of total tea auctioned. the inaugural sale took place on 25 september 1970 and the first lot of tea was auctioned at the price of ₹ 42.50 which, during those days, was a big achievement. in the month of august 2019, a kilogram of maijan orthodox golden tea sold for a record-setting price of ₹ 70,501 at the guwahati tea auction centre.
many centralised, private and international banks have set up their branches in the city with the reserve bank of india having one of its own at pan bazaar.
