guwahati
Administration and governance[edit]
administration and governance[edit]
guwahati city
dispur, the capital of assam, lies in guwahati. the passing of the north eastern (reorganization areas) act in 1971 by the indian parliament accorded meghalaya the status of a full-fledged state. after the creation of meghalaya as a separate state, shillong continued to be the joint capital of both assam and meghalaya. however, in 1972, the government of assam decided to shift the capital to dispur. accordingly, the first sitting of the budget session of the assam legislative assembly was held at dispur on 16 march 1973. dispur houses the secretariat of assam government, the assam assembly house, the national bank for agriculture and rural development (nabard) regional office, the north eastern development finance corporation ltd (nedfi) house and the guwahati tea auction centre (gtac).
guwahati municipal corporation is the local body responsible for governing, developing and managing the city. it is divided into 31 municipal wards. guwahati metropolitan development authority (gmda) is an agency responsible for planning and development of the greater guwahati metropolitan area and for revising the guwahati master plan and building bylaws to cover an area of 3,214 square kilometres (1,241 sq mi) by 2025.
guwahati consists of four assembly constituencies: jalukbari, dispur, gauhati east and gauhati west, all of which are part of gauhati (lok sabha constituency).
police[edit]
guwahati is the headquarters of assam police.
the city is under the police commissionerate of guwahati headed by the commissioner of police, guwahati. it is divided into three districts: east police district, central police district, and west police district, each headed by a deputy commissioner of police. each police district consists of officers, not below the rank of assistant commissioner of police, functioning as executive magistrates within a said metropolitan area.
judiciary[edit]
the gauhati high court
guwahati is the principal seat of the gauhati high court. it acts as the high court of assam and also of nagaland, mizoram and arunachal pradesh with their outlying benches of kohima, aizawl and itanagar, respectively. gauhati high court came in effect from 5 april 1948. it initially had its sittings at shillong but was shifted to gauhati from 14 august 1948.
guwahati also houses the court of the district and sessions judge, kamrup established in 1920. it is a lower court of the district judiciary having territorial jurisdiction over the greater guwahati area only.
problems[edit]
increase in population[edit]
guwahati has seen a rapid rise in population in the past few years. people from other parts of the state and the region routinely migrate to the city chiefly for education and occupation resulting in undesirable expansion of population in the city, which further brings with it many collateral problems in the city. it is expected that the population of the city will rise to 1.5 million by 2035 which is estimated at 1.1 million in 2020.
inflation[edit]
one of the economic problems that the citizens of guwahati have to put up with is the hike in prices of many essentials, chiefly vegetables, poultry, and fish. the prices of these commodities keep escalating at an inordinate rate because of which the buyers find it difficult to buy these items. vegetables are transported into assam from west bengal, bihar, uttar pradesh, delhi, maharashtra and meghalaya and the truckers en route have to pay considerable amount of money as tax at various check posts. it is one of the causes of rise in prices of vegetables in the markets of guwahati. the prices of locally available vegetables and fruits undergo large markup because of transportation expenses grounds, besides intra-state check posts taxes. in addition to these, the wholesale dealers, as well as the retail sellers, augment the prices of the commodities according to their own desires.
the price of poultry, mainly chicken, that reaches the city markets from places like chaygaon and barpeta have been soaring rapidly because of similar factors. there has been steep rise in the price of fish as well, the prominent varieties of which being rohu ("rou"), catla ("bahu"), walking catfish ("magur") and monopterus ("kuchia") among many others.
