guwahati
Sports[edit]
sports[edit]
one-horned rhino statue at sarusajai sports complex
aca stadium, barsapara
indira gandhi athletic stadium
nehru stadium, guwahati
guwahati features the multi-purpose nehru stadium which hosts mostly football and cricket located in the r.g. baruah sports complex, one of the oldest in the city. it comprises the kanaklata indoor stadium (for badminton),  swimming pool and tennis courts. the north-east frontier railway stadium of maligaon, the sports authority of india (sai) complex of paltan bazaar and the judges field are other prominent sporting venues of the city.
the sporting infrastructures specially constructed for the 33rd national games in 2007 include a large stadium at sarusajai—the indira gandhi athletic stadium, the dr. zakir hussain aquatic complex, and the karmabir nabin chandra bordoloi a.c. indoor hall. other new sports structures include the maulana md. tayabullah hockey stadium at bhetapara, the deshbhakta tarun ram phookan indoor stadium at ulubari, rajiv gandhi indoor stadium at amingaon, chachal tennis complex and tepesia sports complex. the renovated sports complexes include ganesh mandir indoor stadium at khanapara, rudra singha sports complex at dispur and gauhati university sports stadium. the indira gandhi athletic stadium was also the main venue of the 2016 south asian games, which was held from 5 to 16 february 2016. the stadium also hosted the himalayan region games in 2017 and the fifa u-17 world cup in india in 2017. it will also host the fifa u-17 women's world cup in india in 2020 including the opening match.
guwahati is home to the professional football club northeast united fc of indian super league. they play their home matches at the indira gandhi athletic stadium. it presents one of the finest football atmospheres in india.
assam cricket association stadium, also known as barsapara cricket stadium, an international cricket venue at barsapara is the home of assam cricket team. it has seating capacity of 40,000. it is the largest cricket stadium in northeast india and 2nd largest in east india. it hosted an india vs australia t20i match in 2017 in its international debut. the first odi in the stadium was held in 2018 between india and west indies.
professional sports clubs based in the city   club sport league stadium established   northeast united fc  football  indian super league  indira gandhi athletic stadium  2014   northeastern warriors  badminton  premier badminton league  karmabir nabin chandra bordoloi indoor stadium  2017   guwahati fc  football  i-league 2nd division, assam state premier league  nehru stadium, north-east frontier railway stadium  2014   aseb sc  football  gsa super division football league  nehru stadium  1975   gauhati town club  football  gsa super division football league, youth league u18  judges field  1906   fc green valley  football  gsa super division football league, assam state premier league  nehru stadium  2010   guwahati city fc  football  indian women's league  udayan kristi sangha field  n.a.   assam titans futsal club  futsal  north east futsal league  karmabir nabin chandra bordoloi indoor stadium  n.a.
