guwahati
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
lokpriya gopinath bordoloi international airport
air[edit]
guwahati is served by the lokpriya gopinath bordoloi international airport, in borjhar, about 20 kilometres (12 mi) west from the heart of the city. with all major domestic and international airlines flying into guwahati, it is the eleventh busiest airport in india in total passenger traffic. daily and weekly flights are available to delhi, mumbai, kolkata, chennai, visakhapatnam, bengaluru, hyderabad, ahmedabad, lucknow, jaipur, kochi, bangkok, paro, kathmandu etc.
rail[edit]
guwahati railway station
the city of guwahati and the northeastern region falls under the northeast frontier railway (nfr) zone of the indian railways, the headquarters of which is in maligaon, near nilachal hills, in the northwest of the city. the guwahati railway station, located in paltan bazaar area of guwahati, is the busiest railway station of the city. it lies along the barauni-guwahati line and guwahati–lumding section, categorised as an a-1 railway station under lumding railway division.
there are four more railway stations in the city – the kamakhya junction for passenger and freight services, the new guwahati railway station (near noonmati) for only freight services, narangi railway station and azara railway station. there are regular trains connecting guwahati to and from other major cities of the country. rajdhani express, poorvottar sampark kranti express, brahmaputra mail, kamrup express, northeast express, saraighat express and garib rath are some significant trains running to and from guwahati. the train with the longest route in india, vivek express, which runs from dibrugarh in upper assam to kanyakumari in the southern tip of india passes through guwahati.
road[edit]
buses standing at rupnath brahma inter-state bus terminal (isbt), guwahati
roads in jalukbari, guwahati
guwahati ropeway
the length of surfaced roads within the city is 218 km (135 mi). national highway 27 connects guwahati with the states west bengal, bihar and rest of india. this highway connects guwahati with silchar in barak valley assam and further connecting the city to the states of meghalaya, manipur, mizoram and tripura. national highway 17 from sevoke in west bengal terminates in jalukbari and connects guwahati with the major cities of dhubri and cooch behar. national highway 15 and its several secondary roads runs through both the banks of river brahmaputra and connects the guwahati with the cities of tezpur, jorhat, dibrugarh in upper assam and the states of arunachal pradesh and nagaland.
public transportation is well developed in the city. buses are the major means of public transport in guwahati. the state-owned assam state urban transport corporation, a subsidiary of assam state transport corporation (astc) and private operators provide the city bus services within the city. astc also operates the volvo air-conditioned bus services within the city as well as to the lgbi airport. in addition to this, there are a number of private bus operators that regularly run day and night bus services from guwahati to neighbouring towns and cities within assam and the other northeastern states. rupnath brahma inter state bus terminus (isbt), located at betkuchi area on nh-37, is the most significant terminal cum transit point for buses plying between guwahati and other destinations in assam and northeast india. the areas of adabari and paltan bazaar also act as nodal points in providing bus services to towns and cities in assam and adjoining states.
a metro rail project has also been planned to relieve the hectic traffic conditions on the streets.
guwahati has also seen a rise in the usage of cycling as a mode of transport and as per some unofficial estimates, there was almost a 50% increase in the number of people who took up cycling in the wake of covid-19. the city has an active cycling community and is amongst the few indian cities that has a bicycle mayor and a junior bicycle mayor.
water[edit]
the inland water transport department is headquartered at pandu port in guwahati. the waterways transportation services in guwahati are used for transporting bulk goods and cargo, and for movement of passenger and tourist vessels. ferry services are available for transportation of people from different ports along the brahmaputra to pandu port.
