gwalior
History[edit]
history[edit]
coin of the alchon huns king mihirakula, who ruled in gwalior circa 520 ce.
the maharaja of gwalior before his palace c. 1887 ce.
according to legend, gwalior was founded in 8 ad after a local chieftain, suraj sen who was cured of leprosy from a drink given to him by a holy man called gwalipa. suraj subsequently set up a town and fort and named them after gwalipa.
the earliest historical record found at gwalior is the gwalior inscription of the alchon hun ruler mihirakula. it describes mihirakula's father toramana (493-515) as "a ruler of the earth, of great merit, who was renowned by the name of the glorious tôramâna; by whom, through (his) heroism that was specially characterized by truthfulness, the earth was governed with justice", and his mihirakula as "the lord of the earth" as of 520 ad.
around the 9th century, the gurjara-pratihara dynasty controlled gwalior and during their rule, they constructed the teli ka mandir temple. in 1021, gwalior was attacked by forces led by mahmud ghazni but they were repelled.
jain statues at siddhachal caves inside gwalior fort.
in 1231 iltutmish captured gwalior after an 11-month-long effort and from then till the 13th century it remained under muslim rule. in 1375, raja veer singh was made the ruler of gwalior and he founded the rule of the tomar clan. during those years, gwalior saw its golden period.
the jain sculptures at gwalior fort were built under tomar rule. man singh tomar made his dream palace, the man mandir palace which is now a tourist attraction at gwalior fort. babur described it as "the pearl in the necklace of forts of india and not even the winds could touch its masts". the daily light and sound show organised there apprise about the history of the gwalior fort and man mandir palace. by the 15th century, the city had a noted singing school which was attended by the prominent figure of hindustani classical music, tansen. after death of mughal emperor aurangzeb the jat ruler bhim singh rana captured gwalior from mughals. later in the 1830s, the scindias captured gwalior and it remained a princely state during the period of british rule.
chaturbhuj temple at gwalior fort claims the world's very first occurrence of zero as a written number.

the maan mandir palace at gwalior fort.
rebellion of 1857[edit]
gwalior is also known for not participating in the 1857 rebellion, mainly due to non-co-operation with rani lakshmibai. after kalpi (jhansi) fell into the hands of the british on 24 may 1858, lakshmibai sought shelter at gwalior fort. the maharaja of gwalior, jayajirao scindia, was not willing to give up his fort without a fight as he was a strong ally of the british, but after negotiations, his troops capitulated and the rebels took possession of the fort. the british attacked gwalior in no time, the battle was fought by lakshmibai. indian forces numbered around 20,000, and british forces around 1,600 troops. lakshmibai's example is remembered to this day by indian nationalists. she died fighting, and gwalior was free from rebels. there is a statue of lakshmibai on her horse which commemorates her contribution to the fight for independence. tantia tope and rao sahib escaped. tantia tope was later captured and hanged in april 1859.
princely state of gwalior[edit]

main article: gwalior state
scindia is a maratha clan in india. this clan included rulers of the gwalior state in the 18th and 19th centuries, who were a princely states during the period of british colonial rule during the 19th and the 20th centuries until india became independent, and politicians in independent india.
map of the city, ca 1914
the scindia state of gwalior became a major regional power in the second half of the 18th century and figured prominently in the three anglo-maratha wars. (gwalior first fell to the british in 1780.) the scindias held significant power over many of the rajput states, and conquered the state of ajmer. during the indian rebellion of 1857, the city was briefly held by rebel forces in 1858 until they were defeated by the british. the scindia family ruled gwalior until india's independence from the united kingdom in 1947, when the maharaja jivajirao scindia acceded to the government of india. gwalior was merged with a number of other princely states to become the new indian state of madhya bharat. jivajirao scindia served as the state's rajpramukh, or the appointed governor, from 28 may 1948 to 31 october 1956, when madhya bharat was merged into madhya pradesh.
in 1962, rajmata vijayraje scindia, the widow of maharaja jivajirao scindia, was elected to the lok sabha, beginning the family's career in electoral politics. she was first a member of the congress party, and later became an influential member of the bharatiya janata party. her son, maharaja madhavrao scindia was elected to the lok sabha in 1971 representing the congress party, and served until his death in 2001. his son, jyotiraditya scindia, also in the congress party, was elected to the seat formerly held by his father in 2004, but later joined bhartiya janata party in 2020.
a king george vi stamp of 1949, inscribed 'gwalior'
