gwalior
Gwalior Metro and suburbs[edit]
gwalior metro and suburbs[edit]
the 2011 census put the population of gwalior's urban area / metropolitan region, comprising gwalior and morar cantonment, at 1,117,740.
old town[edit]
the old town of gwalior, commonly called kila gate is around 1 kilometre (0.62 mi) from hazira, the largest area in old town, which is of considerable size but irregularly built. it lies at the eastern base of the rock and contains the tomb of the sufi saints, khwaja khanoon and muhammad ghaus, erected during the early part of mughal emperor akbar’s reign, and the tomb of mian tansen, a great singer and one of the 'nine jewels' of akbar's court. a town called by his name ghauspura situated near the tomb of mohaommed ghaus.reold town consisted of some streets and mohallas which are presumed to be 700 to 800 yrs old areas in gwalior which are still backward areas in gwalior due to improper management of new town. these old areas are as follows.
koteshwar temple. this temple is a 700 year old temple of lord shiva whose shivling was on gwalior fort, but when the mughals conquered it they ordered the shivling thrown out. when the troops did that, the shivling was automatically established in a field below the fort without any harm. muslim gazi told the emperor not to harm the shivling. in the late 18th century scindias built a temple for that shivling, now known as koteshwar mahadev. baba kapoor- this place is 500 meters away from ghas mandi. this place was named baba kapoor because of saint shah abdul gafoor. kashi naresh ki gali- this a 600 year old residential street in gwalior it was given name as kashi naresh ki gali because in the 14th century when the emperor of kashi was defeated in war he was sent to exile by oppositions at that time gwalior emperor and kashi's emperor were good friends when kashi's emperor told gwalior's emperor whole story, emperor gave him an entire street for living at that time which is now known as kashi naresh ki gali. their family even now resides there in kashi naresh ki gali in rajaji ka bada. (meanings: naresh = king = rajaji; gali = street in hindi language; bada = big area.)
lashkar subcity[edit]
jiwaji chowk at gwalior
the name of lashkar is a persian word meaning 'army' or 'camp', as this was originally the camp, and later the permanent capital, of the scindia dynasty of gwalior state. lashkar was the capital of madhya bharat from 1950 to 1956.
jiwaji chowk is the central focus of lashkar, with a large square, a former opera house, banks, tea, coffee and juice stands and a municipal market building. thriving bazaars surround the chowk. many jewellery shops are situated near jayaji chowk, also known as maharaj bada. a source of water for the city is tighra dam, built on the saank river 20 km to the north. the gajra raja medical college, founded in 1946 by the maharaja jiwaji rao scindia and the maharani vijayaraje scindia, is situated in lashkar on palace road, near katora taal, together with a group of hospitals. jai vilas palace, patterned on the french palace of versailles, is located here.
morar cantonment[edit]
morar cantonment, formerly a separate town, lies 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) east of the old city. it was formerly a british military cantonment. morar is generally considered a rural farming town. the area is known as the "green part" of gwalior because much of the area is still rural.
morar was the scene of the most serious uprising in central india. on 1 june 1858, jayajirao led his forces to morar to fight a rebel army led by tatya tope, rani lakshmibai and rao sahib. this army had 7,000 infantry, 4,000 cavalry and 12 guns while he had only 1,500 cavalry, his bodyguard of 600 men and 8 guns. in this attack, the rebel cavalry took the guns and most of the gwalior forces except the bodyguard went over to the rebels (some deserted). the maharaja and the remainder fled without stopping until they reached the british garrison at agra. by 1900 it had become a centre for local trade and had an important training industry, with a population of 19,179 in 1901.
the sun temple is situated in morar at residency road.
the cantonment area makes up a large area of morar which contains official residences for the indian army. it has many canteens for army personnel. saint paul's school and pragati vidyapeeth school are nearby. there is an air force base in the pinto park region.
thatipur[edit]
view of gwalior fort from the old city
thatipur is said to have got its name from state army unit 34, which once resided there. gandhi road divides thatipur into two areas. morar at one end of the road and balwant nagar on the other.
thatipur primarily consists of residential areas like darpan colony, madhav rao scindhiya enclave, the government blocks, vivek nagar, and suresh nagar. places of note are the dwarikadhish mandir, bhagwan colony, tomar building, chauhan pyaau (the chauhan family), galla kothar, ramkrishna aashram, saraswati nagar, govindpuri, gayatri vihar, shakti vihar, shakuntalapuri, dushyant nagar, shanti vihar, and mayur market along with sai baba mandir in shakti vihar colony.
