gwalior
Transport and connectivity[edit]
transport and connectivity[edit]

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (may 2016) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
railway station gwalior[edit]
gwalior junction
gwalior is a major railway junction in the northern central region. the gwalior junction (station code: gwl) is the part of the north central railways. gwalior is one of the few places where both narrow gauge and broad gauge railways tracks are operational. gwalior is the terminus for the longest narrow gauge route operating in the world, covering a distance of 198 km from gwalior junction to sheopur. gwalior junction is a five railway track intersection point. it won an award for the best and cleanest station of north central railway zone.
goes to agra (agc) goes to jhansi (jhs) goes to shivpuri (svpi) goes to etawah (etw) goes to sheopur kalan (soe) on narrow gauge line
gwalior is one of the major commercial railway stations of the north central railway, whose zone headquarters is centred in allahabad. the station has won awards from indian railways for excellent clean infrastructure in 1987, 1988, 1989 and 1992. it is in the adarsh station category of indian railways.
gwalior light railway connects to the kuno wildlife sanctuary in sheopur. it is the junction point to reach tourist destinations like shivpuri, dholpur and bhind. gwalior is on the main train line between delhi (station code: ndls) and mumbai (bombay) (cstm) and between delhi and chennai (mas).
some trains starting here and travelling towards eastern india via gwalior junction – jhansi junction provide direct connections to points in eastern india including kolkata, barauni, varanasi, and allahabad. there are about fifty trains to new delhi and agra every day, and around the same number of trains to the bhopal and nagpur stations. however, fewer trains are available for long routes like mumbai and chennai. the luxury trains – the maharaja express and the india on wheels – stop at gwalior on their week-long round trip of tourist destinations in central india. more than 180 trains stop at gwalior railway station
road[edit]
gwalior is fairly well connected to other parts of madhya pradesh and india by national and state highways. the proposed north-south-corridor of the golden-quadrilateral highway project passes through the city. the agra-bombay national highway (nh3) passes through gwalior, connecting it to shivpuri on one end and agra on the other. the yamuna expressway is easily accessible from agra for the travelers going to new delhi.
the city is connected to the jhansi by the national highway 75, towards the south of the city. the northern part of the city is connected to the city of mathura via national highway 3. there are bus services to and from all major and minor cities near gwalior, including bhopal, agra, delhi, jabalpur, jhansi, bhind, morena, dholpur, etawah, datia, jaipur, and indore.
airport[edit]
gwalior airport (iata: gwl, icao: vigr), also called rajamata vijaya raje scindia airport, is the airport of gwalior. it has an indian air force base which stations mirage fighters. daily flights to delhi, kolkata, hyderabad, banglore, mumbai, pune , ahemdabad, jaipur, indore, and jammu are available from gwalior airport.
local public transport[edit]
gwalior's public transport system mainly consists of tempos, auto rickshaw taxis, ola cabs, and micro-buses. the municipal corporation's "gwalior city bus" covers some routes in the city. blue radio taxis are also available in gwalior. the tempos and auto rickshaws are often cited as a cause of pollution and road congestion, and the local government has plans to replace the tempos with vans that will run on liquefied petroleum gas. in 2018, a 3 km cycle track was built in the city, and the city became the fourth in india to have this type of facility.
the gwalior metro is the proposed project for gwalior city. the project was announced by state cm shivraj singh chouhan on 17 october 2014. hence district administration is preparing a dpr(detailed project report) for the gwalior metro.
