gwalior
Government[edit]
government[edit]
gwalior town hall
the administration of gwalior is shared between the departments and institutions of three levels of government – civic administration by the gwalior municipal corporation, state administration by government of madhya pradesh, and the central government of india.
the judiciary has four levels: the lowest level being the gwalior gram panchayat (or "gram nyayalaya"). above the gram panchayat is the district court for gwalior district sits lashkar. above that, the madhya pradesh high court has its main seat in jabalpur, but also a permanent bench in gwalior city. the final court of appeal is the supreme court of india.
gwalior municipal corporation[edit]

main article: gwalior municipal corporation
the gwalior municipal corporation is responsible for the civic infrastructure and administration of the city, which is divided into 66 wards.
vivek narayan shejwalkar was the mayor of gwalior municipal corporation before becoming a member of parliament as a bharatiya janta party in the 2019 lok sabha elections. now there is no mayor for gwalior as of august 2019. the municipal commissioner, a member of the indian administrative service, is responsible for the corporations finances and for the services and works conducted for the city.
gwalior municipal corporation covers an area of 289 square kilometres (112 sq mi). the municipality was created on 6 june 1887 with two divisions for lashkar and morar, which later were merged with a single constitutional body.
state government[edit]

main article: government of madhya pradesh
there are four seats in the state legislative assembly (the "madhya pradesh vidhan sabha") responsible for the gwalior municipal area, the constituencies being gwalior, gwalior rural, gwalior east and gwalior south. prior to the 2008 boundary changes the seats were "gird", "lashkar east" and "lashkar west".
state institutions include:
office of the president-board of revenue of madhya pradesh office of the transport-commissioner of madhya pradesh office of the commissioner-land records & settlements madhya pradesh office of the state excise commissioner of madhya pradesh
central government[edit]
the national assembly seat covering gwalior is the gwalior (lok sabha constituency). the seat was held by narendra singh tomar of the bjp.
in may 2019, vivek narayan shejwalkar of bharatiya janata party had been elected as the member of parliament from gwalior.
central government institutions include:
office of the accountant-general (ag) of madhya pradesh defense research & development establishment (drde) border security force (bsf) academy national cadet corps (ncc) officer's training academy (ota) indian air force (iaf) station (maharajpura airbase). office of the narcotics commissioner of india (central bureau of narcotics) central intelligence bureau ho laxmibai national institute of physical education (lnipe) indian army cantonment (morar cantonment) central reserve police force (crpf) ([shivpuri link road ghatigao gwalior)] central potato research institute, gwalior centre for advanced maintenance technology (ministry of railways)
