gwalior
Architecture[edit]
architecture[edit]
gwalior fort[edit]

this section may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may interest only a particular audience. please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against wikipedia's inclusion policy. (august 2017) (learn how and when to remove this template message)

main article: gwalior fort
gwalior fort front side view
at the heart of gwalior is gwalior fort of the tomara dynasty. this structure was reputed to be one of the most structurally sound forts of india, having been improved by raja man singh tomar where a previous structure existed. it occupies an isolated rock outcrop. the hill is steepened to make it virtually unscalable and is surrounded by high walls which enclose buildings from several periods. the old town of gwalior lies at the eastern base of the fortress. lashkar, founded by daulat rao scindia, formerly a separate town that originated as a military camp, lies to the south, and morar, also a formerly separate town, lies to the east. gwalior, lashkar and morar are part of the gwalior municipal corporation.
the fort, popularly called "the gibraltar of india", overlooks the city. the emperor babur reputedly described it as "the pearl in the necklace of the forts of hind". this fort's architecture is unique. it displays a chinese influence on indian architecture, as chinese dragons have been crafted at the hilt of the pillars. this influence was due to trade between china and india at the time of the fort's construction.
after the death of sher shah suri in 1545, who was ruling north india at that time, his son islam shah shifted his capital from delhi to gwalior and constructed 'sher shah mandir' (or 'sher shah fort') in his father's memory. islam shah operated from gwalior until his death in 1553. islam shah had appointed the hindu warrior 'hemu' or hem chandra vikramaditya as his prime minister in sher shah fort for the first time, who later on became the hem chandra vikramaditya king at delhi and established 'hindu raj' in north india.
in the east of the city are two examples of early mughal architecture: the mausoleum of the 16th century sufi saint ghous mohammed and the tomb of mian tansen, a singer and one of the 'nine jewels' of the mughal emperor akbar's court. right next to them is the gujari mahal, built by tomar rajput king man singh tomar on demand of his consort gujar princess mrignayani. close to the heart of the city is jai vilas palace of the scindia dynasty, patterned on the palace of versailles. it combines tuscan, italian and corinthian styles of architecture. historically and architecturally, gwalior is interesting first as an ancient seat of jain worship; second for its example of palace architecture of the hindu period between 1486 and 1516; and third as an historic fortress. many historical places are found near the dabra-bhitarwar road. prior to the founding of gwalior, the region was also known by its ancient name of gopasetra. gwalior had an institutional seat of the bhattarakas of kashtha sangh and later mula sangh.
gopachal[edit]

main article: gopachal

siddhachal cavesgopachalrock cut images of the tirthankaras in gwalior
gopachal parvat is situated on the mountainous terrain at the slopes of gwalior fort. gopachal parvat contains unique statues of jain tirthankaras. the idol of parshvanath seated on a lotus (carved out of a single stone) is the largest in the world, towering at 14 metres (46 ft) in height and 9 metres (30 ft) in breadth. there is a series of 26 jain statues in a single line. built between 1398 and 1536 by tomar kings, these jain tirthankar statues are one of a kind in architecture.
siddhachal caves[edit]

main article: siddhachal caves
jain rock-cut sculptures of siddhachal caves – a striking part of the jain remains at gwalior is a series of caves or rock-cut sculptures, excavated in the rock on all sides, and numbering nearly a hundred, great and small. most of them are mere niches to hold statues, though some are cells that may have been originally intended for residences. according to inscriptions, they were all excavated within a short period of about thirty-three years, between 1441 and 1474. one of the colossal figures is 57 ft (17 m) high, taller than any other in northern india.
sas-bahu temple[edit]

main article: sas-bahu temple
sas-bahu temple, a 9th-century shrine, sas-bahu temple in the fort allures not only the devotees but also the tourists with its artistic value. despite what its name may suggest, these temples are not dedicated to sas (mother-in-law) and bahu (daughter-in-law) but rather the short form of shashtra bahu, another name for lord vishnu. these temples situated adjacent to each other and the larger one is elaborately decorated with carvings and sculptures. the roof of the larger temple is adorned with a lotus carving.
teli ka mandir[edit]

main article: teli ka mandir
teli-ka-mandir
teli ka mandir (telangana mandir) – a structure of about 100 feet, teli ka mandir in gwalior fort distinguishes itself from the other compositions of its time because of its unique architecture. the temple bears a close resemblance to the temple of prathihara vishnu, and is filled with images of coiled serpents, passionate couples, river goddesses, and a flying garuda. the temple architecture follows the indo-aryan and nagara styles and is believed to be among the oldest constructions in the fort. the telikā mandir, or 'oil-man's temple', owes its name to teli, a term for an oil grinder or oil dealer. many suggestions have been put forward to explain this name historically, but in fact the name is not old, the temple being used for processing oil before the british occupied the fort and used the building, albeit temporarily, as a coffee shop. the telikā mandir is the loftiest temple among all the buildings in gwalior fort with a height of about 30 meters. the temple consists of a garba griha, that is, sanctum proper for the deity, and an antarala to enter into the temple. it can be approached by a flight of steps provided on the eastern side. the most striking feature of the temple is the wagon-vaulted roof, a form used over rectangular shrines which normally accommodated a row of mother goddesses. the goddesses from the interior vanished centuries ago and have not been traced. the exterior walls of the temple are decorated with sculptures, many of which are damaged; the niches, shaped like temples, are empty. the building carries a dedicatory inscription to the goddess in a niche on the southern side, but otherwise does not have any history. the architectural style points to a date in the late 8th century. the entrance gateway on the eastern side is a later addition of the british period, made by major keith in 1881. it was built as a way of saving various historic pillars and other pieces no longer in their original context.
other monuments[edit]
gurudwara datta bandi choodh- gwalior fort also has the gurudwara, built in the memory of the sixth sikh, guru har gobind. this gurudwara is particularly large and grand, built entirely of marble with coloured glass decorating the main building. recital of the guru granth sahib takes place here and mughal kings used to visit gwalior regularly. there is a gurdwara that was converted to a mandir of "kalli devi" and process is on to take it back by sikhs. municipality museum, is situated a little distance from rani lakshmibai's tomb. modern 5d is madhya pradesh's first multi-dimensional theatre launched in the 2011 trade fair of gwalior. it was built by gwalior's leading enterprise modern techno projects (p) ltd. modern 5d is recognised as india's first own multi-dimensional theatre. shyam vatika is a banquet hall which has the world's largest indoor mural, as recognised by guinness world records. within the fort are some marvels of medieval architecture. the 15th century gujari mahal is a monument to the love of raja mansingh tomar for his gujar queen, mrignayani. the outer structure of gujari mahal has survived in an almost total state of preservation; the interior has been converted into an archaeological museum housing rare antiquities, some of them dating back to the 1st century a.d. many of these have been defaced by the iconoclastic mughals. adhyatma niketan is an important ashram near gwalior fort.
jai vilas palace
jai vilas mahal[edit]

main article: jai vilas mahal
also called jai vilas palace, is the residential palace turned museum of the maratha rulers of gwalior – the scindias. the palace has notable collections of antiques. the museum is one of the largest in madhya pradesh and has the world's largest chandelier and the complex is a mixture of british and hindu architecture. the palace was constructed in 1874 as an attempt to bring the palace of versailles to gwalior.
tombs and chatris of historic importance[edit]
gaus mohammad tomb
chatris of scindias is situated close to the city near achaleshwar temple and is the burial place for the scindias who ruled the city for numerous years. designated persons like maharaja madhavrao scindia, vijayaraje scindia and his highness jivajirao scindia were cremated here. tansen's tomb: gwalior is the birthplace of the musician tansen. he was one of the "nine gems of akbar". gaus mohammad's tomb: the tombs of great gaus mohammad and tansen are situated on the same territory. tomb of rani lakshmibai, a famous freedom fighter, at phoolbag area. it is here where the she died in 1858 fighting against the british. it is also her burial place.
sun temple
sun temple[edit]
located in § morar cantonment, the sun temple "vivsvaan mandir" is dedicated to the sun god surya. designed as a facsimile of the sun temple of konark in odisha, the temple was sponsored and built in the 1980s by the birla family.
the temple is located in a serene ambience and a well-maintained garden within the temple premises is very attractive. this holy temple draws the locals and tourists alike who gather here to render their prayers. before the temple was built the gardens had the name tapovan. the gardens were the location of an ill-fated attempt to introduce african lions by the maharaja of gwalior state.
