hajipur
Transport and connectivity[edit]
transport and connectivity[edit]
hajipur junction
mahatma gandhi setu
hajipur city has a modern railway zonal office. it is the headquarters of the east central railway zone of the indian railways. hajipur junction is directly connected to most of the major cities in india. public transportation is provided for by buses, auto rickshaws and local trains. bsrtc has started city bus service on hajipur via patna. luxury bus service in hajipur running via nh-31 connects several neighbouring cities is provided by the bihar state road transport corporation. auto rickshaws are a popular mode of transportation. app based cab service is available.
asia's longest river bridge, the mahatma gandhi setu (built 1982), is in hajipur and connects the city to patna across the ganga. the four lane prestressed rcc bridge was commissioned into service during the year 1982. travellers get an enthralling experience and panoramic view of lush green banana plantations.
the city is primarily served by lok nayak jayaprakash airport, patna (pat) - which is just 21.2 km (13.2 miles) sw or an hour drive from hajipur.
hajipur is connected to other parts of india through national and state highways. hajipur is well connected with roads to various major cities of bihar like patna, sonpur, vaishali, muzaffarpur, samastipur, and chhapra. the major highways are-
nh 31 touches the city and connects it to chhapra which further joins ghazipur city in up. nh 31 starts from patna and is connected further with gaya and bodhgaya through state highway.  nh 22 connects hajipur to sonbarsa (nepal border) via muzaffarpur and sitamarhi  nh 322 starts from hajipur to musrigharari (samastipur) via jandaha sh 74 connects hajipur to lalganj, vaishali. sh 49 connects hajipur to mahua, tajpur, samastipur sh 93 connects hajipur to mahnar, mohiuddinagar kacchi dargah–bidupur bridge is a big project of bihar. the chief minister of bihar nitish kumar announced it on 23 august 2015. this bridge will be connecting two major national highways. this bridge will be the longest bridge in india after completion.
