hajipur
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]
ramchaura mandir[edit]
the ramchaura mandir is a hindu temple in the city of hajipur, bihar. dedicated to lord ram. as per local folklore, it is said to have been in existence since the ramayana period and shri ram is believed to have visited this place on his way to janakpur, where his footprints are worshiped. the ramchaura mandir has a tradition of celebrating rama navami, on the birth anniversary of shri rama. a small fair is also organised on the eve of rama navami. archeological objects excavated from ramchaura are kept at the patna museum.
pataleshwar mandir[edit]
dedicated to lord shiva, pataleshwar mandir is located at hajipur. since, the ancient period shiva is believed to be in the form of lingam here. the worship of the shiva-linga originated from the famous hymn in the atharva-veda samhita sung in praise of the yupa-stambha.
kaunhaara ghat[edit]
lord vishnu with gaja and graah
it is considered one of the main ghats of ganga—gandak, where worshiping and cremation has been performed for centuries. this ghat received its name based on an ancient legend. according to this legend, "the famous fight of gaja (elephant)-graah (crocodile), which is well covered in indian scriptures, is the reason behind people asking -kaun haara. hence the name- kaunhara ghat. scriptures tell that lord vishnu had to interfere in the fight to save his devotee gajaraj, who was being drowned by a crocodile. both gaja and graah were gandharvas. but due to some curse, they became gaja and graah. lord vishnu killed graah to give him instant salvation, and saved the life of gajaraj." the depiction of fighting gaja—graah is an emblem for the city and is prominently shown on the hajipur railway station's dome and other notable places.
jami masjid[edit]
jami masjid
jami masjid is one of the states' oldest mosques erected in 1587 ad during the mughal rule by makhsus shah, the contemporary governor of bihar sharif according to akbarnamah. the remarkable monument is a spectacular example of indo-persian architecture, the central dome being larger than the others.
sonepur cattle fair[edit]
located opposite hajipur is a place of sonepur where the forty-night-long sonepur cattle fair is held every year starting from kartik full moon day. the place goes lively at the onset of winter with the mass holy deep in river gandak by hindu at kaun—haara ghat. being claimed as the biggest animal fair in asia. government of bihar's department of rural development, department of agriculture organises training and exhibitions. the visitors can stay in hotels at hajipur or they can hire luxury swiss cottages erected on sand dunes beside river gandak. the tent and cottages are provided by department of state tourism.
vaishali mahotsava[edit]
vishwa shanti stupa
the ancient village of vaishali is located 35 km north—west of hajipur. the place can be reached by road and offers many archaeological places to see which includes buddha stupa, pillars of ashoka, abhishek puskarani (coronation tank of vajjika rulers). vaishali mahotsava is held every year on baisakh purnima (full moon day of 1st hindu month) during mid-april to celebrate the birth anniversary of 24th jain tirthankar—mahavir who was born here in the village kundalpur, 4 km from vaishali. the soil of this land is blessed by the visit of buddha twice during the 3rd century bc.
museums
deep narayan singh museum was established in 1979.
