haridwar
Religious sites[edit]
religious sites[edit]
"haridvāre kuśāvarte bilvake nīla parvate snatvā kanakhale tīrth punarjanma na vidyate"
the clock tower on the malviya dwip at har ki pauri.
in hindu traditions, the 'panch tirth' (five pilgrimages) within haridwar, are "gangadwar" (har ki pauri), kushawart (ghat in kankhal), bilwa tirtha (mansa devi temple) and neel parvat (chandi devi temple). there are several other temples and ashrams located in and around the city, a list of which can be found below. also, alcohol and non-vegetarian food is not permitted in haridwar.
har ki pauri[edit]

main article: har ki pauri
the haridwar kumbh mela is held in every 12 years and the date is determined by hindu astrology.
this ghat was constructed by king vikramaditya (1st century bce) in memory of his brother bharthari. it is believed that bharthari came to haridwar and meditated on the banks of the holy ganges. when he died, his brother constructed a ghat in his name, which later came to be known as har ki pauri. the most sacred ghat within har ki pauri is brahmakund. the evening prayer (aarti) at dusk offered to goddess ganga at har ki pauri (steps of god hara or shiva) is an enchanting experience for any visitor. a spectacle of sound and colour is seen when, after the ceremony, pilgrims float diyas (floral floats with lamps) and incense on the river, commemorating their deceased ancestors. thousands of people from all around the world do make a point to attend this prayer on their visit to haridwar. a majority of present ghats were largely developed in the 1800s. on the night of dussehra or a few days before that, the ganga canal is dried in haridwar to clean the riverbed. the water is restored on diwali. it is believed that on dussera maa ganga goes to her father's house and returns after bhai duj or bhai phota. it is for this reason that the waters in the ganga canal in haridwar are partially dried on the night of dussehra and the waters are restored on the day of bhai duj or bhai phota.
chandi devi temple[edit]

main article: chandi devi temple, haridwar
the temple is dedicated to goddess chandi, who sits atop the 'neel parvat' on the eastern bank of the river ganges. it was constructed in 1929 ce by the king of kashmir, suchat singh. skanda purana mentions a legend, in which chanda-munda, the army chief of a local demon kings shumbha and nishumbha were killed by goddess chandi here, after which the place got the name, chandi devi. it is believed that the main statue was established by the adi shankaracharya in the 8th century ce. the temple is a 3 km (1.9 mi) trek from chandighat and can also be reached through a ropeway.
mansa devi temple[edit]

main article: mansa devi temple, haridwar
the temple of goddess mansa devi is situated at the top of the bilva parvat, literally means 'goddess fulfilling desires'. mansa is a tourist destination, especially because of the mountain cable cars which offer city views. the main temple houses two idols of the goddess, one with three mouths and five arms, while the other one has eight arms.
maya devi temple[edit]

main article: maya devi temple, haridwar
haridwar was previously known as mayapuri which is because of the goddess maya devi. dating to the 11th century ce, this ancient temple of maya devi, the adhishthatri devi (patron goddess) of haridwar, is considered one of the siddhapithas and is said to be the place where the heart and navel of goddess sati had fallen. it is one of few ancient temples still standing in haridwar, along with narayani shila temple and bhairav temple.
makarvahini temple[edit]
located close to the birla ghat, near laltarao pul is a temple dedicated to goddess ganga. this temple was established by jayandra saraswati, shankaracharya of kanchi kamakoti, a few decades ago. the temple, built in south-indian style, has a traditional custom of decorating the goddess with vegetables and dry fruits, giving her the title of shakumbhari on ashtami pooja, the eighth day of navratri.
kankhal[edit]
das mahavidya temple, daksheswara mahadev temple
ropeway to mansa devi temple, haridwar.
bholanath sevashram temple by the ganges, haridwar

main article: daksheswara mahadev temple
the ancient temple of daksha mahadev also known as daksheshwar mahadev temple has situated in the south kankhal town. according to hindu texts, king daksha prajapati, father of dakshayani,  shiva's first wife, performed a yagña, to which he deliberately did not invite  shiva. when she arrived uninvited, he was further insulted by the king, seeing which sati felt infuriated and self-immolated herself in the yagna kund. king daksha was later killed by virabhadra, born out of shiva's anger. later the king was brought to life and given a goat's head by shiva. daksha mahadev temple is a tribute to this legend.
sati kund, another well-known mythological heritage worth a visit is situated in the kankhal. legend has it that sati immolated herself in this kund.
bharat mata mandir[edit]

main article: bharat mata
bharat mata mandir is a multi-storey temple dedicated to bharat mata (mother india). bharat mata mandir was inaugurated on 15 may 1983 by indira gandhi on the banks of the river ganges. it is situated adjacent to the samanvaya ashram, and stands eight stories tall to a height of 180 feet (55 m). each floor depicts an era in the indian history, from the days of ramayana until india's independence.
on the first floor is the statue of bharat mata. the second floor, shur mandir, is dedicated to the well-renowned heroes of india. the third floor matri mandir is dedicated to the achievements of india's revered women, such as radha, mira, savitri, draupadi, ahilya, anusuya, maitreyi, gargi etc. the great saints from various religions, including jainism, sikhism, and buddhism are featured on the fourth floor sant mandir. the assembly hall with walls depicting symbolic coexistence of all religions practised in india and paintings portraying history in various provinces is situated on the fifth floor. the various forms of the goddess shakti can be seen on the sixth floor, whilst the seventh floor is devoted to all incarnations of  vishnu. the eighth floor holds the shrine of  shiva from which devotees can gain a view of himalayas, haridwar, and the campus of sapta sarovar.
the temple was built under the former shankaracharya maha-mandleshwar swami satyamitranand giri maharaj.  since the inception of the swami satyamitranand foundation in 1998, several other branches have been opened, namely in renukut, jabalpur, jodhpur, indore, and ahmedabad. it is presently under the junapeethadheesh, acharya shree mahamandaleshwar swami avdheshanand giri ji maharaj.
piran kaliyar[edit]
piran kaliyar sharif, built by ibrahim lodhi, a ruler of delhi, this 'dargah' of hazrat alauddin sabir kaliyari, a 13th-century, sufi saint of chishti order (also known as sarkar sabir pak), in kaliyar village, 7 km (4.3 mi). from roorkee, is visited by devotees from all over the world, during the annual 'urs' festival, which is celebrated from 1st day of sighting the moon to 16th day of rabi al-awwal month, in the islamic calendar.
neel dhara pakshi vihar[edit]
at a distance of 3.5 km (2.2 mi) from haridwar junction railway station, neel dhara pakshi vihar is a bird-watching point situated at the bhimgoda barrage of haridwar and has rich flora and fauna. the bhimgoda barrage is on the ganges river near har-ki-pauri ghat. the barrage was originally built to aid irrigation but it also generates hydro-electric power and controls floods. the area behind the barrage is known as neel dhara pakshi vihar. the place is popular among bird-loving tourists. the place is known for siberian cranes that can be spotted during the winter months at laljiwala. in addition, the place is also a natural habitat of different species of migratory birds. not only avid bird watchers, but the spot also welcomes a number of nature lovers and trekkers. also, the spot of neel dhara pakshi vihar is visited by trekkers as it is situated close to many trekking routes in haridwar. visitors can also see the shivalik hills from the bird watching point and enjoy the sight of the snow-covered mountains which makes it to the top list of tourist attractions in haridwar.
haridwar from chilla range, rajaji national park
other temples and ashrams[edit]
dudhadhari barfani temple, part of the ashram of dudhadhari barfani baba, was constructed from shining white marble and honours rama-sita and hanumana.sureshvari devi temple, a temple dedicated to the goddess sureshwari, is situated in the middle of rajaji national park, and thus is only accessible with permission from forest rangers. pawan dham is a modern temple made entirely of glass pieces, which is now a tourist destination.
one of the most sacred temples in haridwar is tirupati balaji mandir. the temple, which is built in the dravidian architectural style, is located 4.5 km (2.8 mi) away from har ki pauri. it is a major pilgrimage centre of haridwar in uttrakhand. the image of the temple deity represents both  vishnu and  shiva ( vishnu is considered as the preserver whereas  shiva is considered as the destroyer in hindu religion).
shiva statue by the ganges, across har-ki-pauri, haridwar
sapt rishi ashram at sapt sarovar, near the bank of the ganga, is a meditation and yoga centre. the ashram, established in 1943 by guru goswami dutt, provides lodging, meals and free education for poor kids. sapt rishi ashram, as its name would suggest, was the place where seven sages, namely kashyapa, vashisht, atri, vishwamitra, jamadagi, bharadwaja and gautam, meditated. as per the mythological records, when all the sages were meditating, they were disturbed by the gushing sound of river ganges. annoyed and irritated due to sound, all seven of them were trapped in the flow of the river. later, ganges river splits into seven water streams so there is less noise. those seven river streams are now known as sapt sarovar, and the point where the seven sages meditated is called as saptrishi ashram.
in the harihar ashram, kankhal, the parad shivalinga (mercury shivalinga) weighing about 150  kg and a rudraksha tree are the main attractions for pilgrims and tourists. the ramanand ashram, situated in the shravan nath nagar district near the railway station, is the main ashram of ramanand sampraday in haridwar. the uma maheswar sanyas ashram lies on the banks of the ganga, in bairagi camp; while the anandamayi maa ashram is located in kankhal, one of five sub-cities of haridwar, and houses the samadhi shrine of sri anandamoyi ma (1896–1982), a noted saint of india. shantikunj is the headquarters of the spiritual and social organisation all world gayatri pariwar (awgp) established by pandit shriram sharma acharya. located six km (3.7 mi) from haridwar railway station, at the bank of the ganges and under the shivalik himalayas, it is a place of attraction for tourists as well as seekers of spiritual guidance.
shri chintamani parshwnath jain shwetambar mandir
the shri chintamani parshwnath jain shwetambar mandir was built in 1990 by jain saint shri padam sagar suri. this temple is built by jaisalmer stone in jain architectural style. moolnayak of this temple is a black coloured idol of chintamani parshwnath bhagwan in padmasan posture. idols of shri parshv yaksha and mata padmawati on both sides of the main idol. there is also an idol of rishabhanatha made up of white marble. there is small temple of shri ghantakaran mahavir ji and charan-paduka's (foot imprints) near this temple. the temple also has a dharmshala for accommodation of around 1000 pilgrims at a time.
pantanjali yogpeeth
the patanjali yogpeeth is situated in haridwar-delhi highway. this is a yoga institution and research centre of swami ramdev. every day thousands of people come here for yoga and other purposes. the ramakrishna math and ramakrishna mission sevashrama is a branch of the worldwide ramakrishna movement. the mission centre was founded in 1901, and the math centre was started in 1980. the math centre conducts daily worship and bhajans, and fortnightly ramnam sankirtan.
