haridwar
Educational institutions[edit]
educational institutions[edit]
unipolaris academy[edit]
an edtech startup in haridwar providing live online classes through visualization techniques.
acharyakulam[edit]
situated in haridwar- delhi highway it is the part of patanjali group.  this is residential institution.
gurukul kangri university[edit]
situated in kankhal, at the banks of the river ganges, gurukul kangri university is one of the oldest universities of india, it was founded in 1902 by swami shraddhananda (1856–1926), according to the tenets of swami dayananda saraswati, the founder of arya samaj. it has also been visited by british trade union leader charles freer andrews and british prime minister, ramsay macdonald, to study the unique gurukul based education system. here ancient vedic and sanskrit literature, ayurveda, philosophy are part of the curriculum besides modern sciences and journalism. its 'archaeological museum', (established 1945) houses some rare statues, coins, paintings, manuscripts, and artefacts, starting from indus valley civilisation culture (c. 2500–1500 bce). mahatma gandhi visited the campus three times, and stayed in its sprawling and serene campus for extended periods of time, most notably during the 1915 kumbh mela, followed by a visit in 1916, when on 20 march, he spoke at gurukul anniversary.
dev sanskriti vishwavidyalaya[edit]
dev sanskriti vishwavidyalaya was established in 2002 by the act of the uttarakhand government is a fully residential university. run by shri vedmata gayatri trust, shantikunj, haridwar (headquarters of all world gayatri pariwar), it provides various degree, diploma and certificate courses in areas like yogic science, alternative therapy, indian culture, tourism, rural management, theology, spiritual counseling, etc. it also provides courses through distance learning.
uttarakhand sanskrit university[edit]
set up by the government of uttarakhand, the university is dedicated to studies of ancient sanskrit scriptures and books. it also has a curriculum covering ancient hindu rituals, culture, and tradition, and boasts of a building inspired by ancient hindu architecture style.
chinmaya degree college[edit]
situated in shivalik nagar, 10 km (6.2 mi) from haridwar city. one of the science colleges in haridwar.
hec pg college[edit]
it was established in the year 2002. hec college provides undergraduate, postgraduate, pg diploma courses. the courses are in the field of commerce, management, science, lib. science and arts and it is affiliated to hnb garhwal university, sri nagar, garhwal, and sri dev suman uttarakhand university, badshahithol, tehri garhwal.
sheel institute[edit]
situated in shivalik nagar, 10 km (6.2 mi) from haridwar city. one of the best computer institute in haridwar.
other colleges[edit]
there are two state ayurvedic college & hospital in haridwar, one is rishikul state ayurvedic college (has pg level courses) and the other is gurukul ayurvedic college.
other schools[edit]
delhi public school, haridwar kendriya vidyalaya, b.h.e.l. haridwar dav central public school, jagjeetpur
