haridwar
Important areas within the city[edit]
important areas within the city[edit]
b.h.e.l., ranipur township the campus of bharat heavy electricals limited, a maharatna public sector undertaking (psu) is spread across an area of 12 km (4.6 sq mi). the main factory consists of two divisions: the heavy electricals equipment plant (heep), and the central foundry forge plant (cffp). together they employ over 8000 skilled employees. the campus is divided into six sectors providing excellent residential, schooling and medical facilities.
bahadrabad – 7 km (4.3 mi) it is located on the haridwar–delhi national highway at a distance of 7 km (4.3 mi) from haridwar. close by, in village pathri, lies the bhimgoda barrage built on the upper ganges canal in 1955. it also has a block development office responsible for many developed villages (e.g. khedli, kisanpur rohalki, atmalpur bongla, sitapur, alipur, salempur).
sidcul – 5 km (3.1 mi) a massive industrial area, spread over 2,034 acres (823 ha), developed by state industrial development corporation of uttarakhand (sidcul), a state government body. with the arrival of big enterprises like itc, hindustan unilever limited, dabur, mahindra & mahindra, havells and kirby, sidcul is set to develop into another industrial township within the city. three km (1.9 mi) away from the delhi-hardwar national highway, sidcul lies adjacent to the bhel township, an important public sector township.
jwalapur an old part of the city, jwalapur is the financial and industrial capital of the city, and now an important trading and shopping centre for the locals. the town dates back to 1700 ce. this town was called mohammed pura and ruled by a local muslim ruler. in the early 1600s the family of sisodias from mewar, descendants of rana pratap, fleeing from the mughal invasion, came to settle on the outskirts of haridwar. the families lived quietly for almost a generation to avoid detection. local people renamed their surname to mehta. it is firmly believed that in early 1700 the mehtas dislodged the muslim ruler and renamed the town as jwalapur. this family subsequently settled in jwalapur itself and intermarried with the local population.
cheela dam a good picnic spot with a dam and a man-made lake nearby. elephants and other wild animals may be spotted.
shivalik nagar one of the newest and biggest residential areas of haridwar. it is divided into various clusters. it was originally developed as a residential colony for bhel employees, but with the advent of sidcul, population and financial activity has grown rapidly in the area due to its proximity.
