haridwar
History[edit]
history[edit]
main article: haridwar in scriptures
prince bhagiratha in penance for the salvation of 60,000 of his ancestors.
in the scriptures, haridwar has been variously mentioned as kapilasthana, gangadwara and mayapuri. it is also an entry point to the char dham (the four main centres of pilgrimage in uttarakhand viz, badrinath, kedarnath, gangotri, and yamunotri), hence, shaivaites (followers of  shiva) and vaishnavites (followers of  vishnu) call this place hardwar and haridwar respectively, corresponding to hara being shiv and hari being vishnu.
gangadhara, shiva bearing the descent of the ganges river as parvati and bhagiratha, and the bull nandi look on. circa 1740
"o yudhishthira, the spot where ganga rusheth past, cleaving the foremost of mountains which is frequented by gandharvas and yakshas and rakshasas and apsaras, and inhabited by hunters, and kinnaras, is called gangadwara (haridwar). o king, sanatkumara regardeth that spot visited by brahmarshis, as also the tirtha kanakhala (that is near to it), as sacred."   the mahabharata, vana parva: tirthayatra parva: section xc.
in the vanaparva of the mahabharat, where sage dhaumya tells yudhishthira about the tirthas of india, gangadwar, i.e., haridwar and kankhal, have been referred to, the text also mentions that agastya rishi did penance here, with the help of his wife, lopamudra (the princess of vidharba).
sage kapila is said to have an ashram here giving it, its ancient name, kapila or kapilasthana.
the legendary king, bhagiratha, the great-grandson of the suryavanshi king sagar (an ancestor of rama), is said to have brought the river ganges down from heaven, through years of penance in satya yuga, for the salvation of 60,000 of his ancestors from the curse of the saint kapila, a tradition continued by thousands of devout hindus, who bring the ashes of their departed family members, in hope of their salvation.  vishnu is said to have left his footprint on the stone that is set in the upper wall of har ki pauri, where the holy ganges touches it at all times.
haridwar came under the rule of the maurya empire (322–185 bce), and later under the kushan empire (c. 1st–3rd centuries). archaeological findings have proved that terra cotta culture dating between 1700 bce and 1200 bce existed in this region. first modern era written evidence of haridwar is found in the accounts of a chinese traveller, huan tsang, who visited india in 629 ce. during the reign of king harshavardhan (590–647) records haridwar as 'mo-yu-lo', the remains of which still exist at mayapur, a little to the south of the modern town. among the ruins are a fort and three temples, decorated with broken stone sculptures, he also mentions the presence of a temple, north of mo-yu-lo called 'gangadwara', gateway of the ganges.

head of the ganges canal, haridwar, ca 1894–1898.
haridwar from the opposite bank of the ganges, 1866
haridwar came under the rule of the delhi sultanate in 1206.
the city also fell to the central asian conqueror timur lang (1336–1405) on 13 january 1399.
during his visit to haridwar, first sikh guru, guru nanak (1469–1539) bathed at 'kushawart ghat', wherein the famous, 'watering the crops' episode took place, his visit is today commemorated by a gurudwara (gurudwara nanakwara), according to two sikh janamsakhis, this visit took place on the baisakhi day in 1504 ce, he later also visited kankhal en route to kotdwara in garhwal. pandas of the haridwar have been known to keep genealogy records of most of the hindu population. known as vahis, these records are updated on each visit to the city, and are a repository of vast family trees of the family in north india.
in the 16th century, the city came under the rule of the mughals. ain-e-akbari, written by abul fazal in the 16th century during the reign of mughal emperor akbar, refers to it as maya (mayapur), known as hardwar on the ganges", as seven sacred cities of hindus. it further mentions it is eighteen kos (each approx. 2 km) in length, and large numbers of pilgrims assemble on the 10th of chaitra. it also mentions that during his travels and also while at home, mughal emperor, akbar drank water from the ganges river, which he called 'the water of immortality'. special people were stationed at sorun and later haridwar to dispatch water, in sealed jars, to wherever he was stationed
during the mughal period, there was mint for akbar's copper coinage at haridwar. it is said that raja man singh of amber, laid that foundation of the present-day city of haridwar and also renovated the ghats at har ki pauri. after his death, his ashes are also said to have been immersed at brahma kund. thomas coryat, an english traveller, who visited the city in the reign of emperor jahangir (1596–1627) mentions it as 'haridwara', the capital of shiva.
being one of the oldest living cities, haridwar finds its mention in the ancient hindu scriptures as it weaves through the life and time stretching from the period of the buddha, to the more recent british advent. haridwar has a rich and ancient religious and cultural heritage. it still has many old havelis and mansions bearing exquisite murals and intricate stonework.
one of the two major dams on the river ganges, the bhimgoda, is situated here. built-in the 1840s, it diverts the waters of the ganges to the upper ganges canal, which irrigated the surrounding lands. though this caused severe deterioration to the ganges water flow, and is a major cause for the decay of the ganges as an inland waterway, which till the 18th century was used heavily by the ships of the east india company, and a town as high up as tehri, was considered a port city the headworks of the ganges canal system is located in haridwar. the upper ganges canal was opened in 1854 after the work began in april 1842, prompted by the famine of 1837–38. the unique feature of the canal is the half-kilometre-long aqueduct over the solani river at roorkee, which raises the canal 25 m (82 ft) above the original river.
haridwar as a part of the united province, 1903
'haridwar union municipality' was constituted in 1868, which included the then villages of mayapur and kankhal. haridwar was first connected with railways, via laksar, through branch line in 1886, when the awadh and rohilakhand railway line was extended through roorkee to saharanpur, this was later extended to dehradun in 1900.
in 1901, it had a population of 25,597 and was a part of the roorkee tehsil, in saharanpur district of the united province, and remained so till the creation of uttar pradesh in 1947.
haridwar has been an abode of the weary in body, mind, and spirit. it has also been a centre of attraction for learning various arts, science, and culture. the city has a long-standing position as a great source of ayurvedic medicines and herbal remedies and is home to the unique gurukul (school of traditional education), including the gurukul kangri vishwavidyalaya, which has a vast campus, and has been providing traditional education of its own kind, since 1902. development of haridwar took an upturn in the 1960s, with the setting up of a temple of modern civilisation, bhel, a 'maharatna psu' in 1975, which brought along not just a its own township of bhel, ranipur, close to the existing ranipur village, but also a set of ancillaries in the region. the university of roorkee, now iit roorkee, is one of the oldest and most prestigious institutes of learning in the fields of science and engineering.
