hazaribagh
History[edit]
history[edit]
in ancient times the district was covered with inaccessible forests inhabited by tribes who remained independent. the entire territory of chhotanagpur, now known as jharkhand (meaning forest territory) was presumably beyond the pale of outside influence in ancient india. throughout the turko-afghan period (up to 1526), the area remained virtually free from external influence. it was only with the accession of akbar to the throne of delhi in 1557 that muslim influence penetrated jharkhand, then known to the mughals as kokrah. in 1585, akbar sent a force under the command of shahbaj khan to reduce the raja of chotanagpur to the position of a tributary. after the death of akbar in 1605, the area presumably regained its independence. this necessitated an expedition in 1616 by ibrahim khan fateh jang, the governor of bihar and brother of queen noorjehan. ibrahim khan defeated and captured durjan sal, the 46th raja of chotanagpur. he was imprisoned for 12 years but was later released and reinstated on the throne after he had shown his ability in distinguishing a real diamond from a fake one.
in 1632, chotanagpur was given as jagir (endowment) to the governor at patna for an annual payment of rs.136,000. this was raised to rs.161,000 in 1636. during the reign of muhammad shah (1719–1748), sarballand khan, the governor of then bihar, marched against the raja of chotanagpur and obtained his submission. another expedition was led by fakhruddoula, the governor of bihar in 1731. he came to terms with the raja of chotanagpur. in 1735 alivardi khan had some difficulty in enforcing the payment of the annual tribute of rs.12,000 from the raja of ramgarh, as agreed to by the latter according to the terms settled with fakhruddoula.
this situation continued until the occupation of the country by the british. during the muslim period, the main estates in the district were ramgarh, kunda, chai and kharagdiha. subsequent to the kol uprising in 1831 that, however, did not seriously affect hazaribagh, the administrative structure of the territory was changed. the parganas of ramgarh, kharagdiha, kendi and kunda became parts of the south-west frontier agency and were formed into a division named hazaribagh as the administrative headquarters. in 1854 the designation of south-west frontier agency was changed to chota nagpur division, composed of five districts - hazaribagh, ranchi, palamau, manbhum, and singhbhum. the division was administered as a non-regulation province under a commissioner reporting to the lieutenant governor of bengal. in 1855-56 there was the great uprising of the santhals against the british but was brutally suppressed. during british rule, one had to go by train to giridih and then travel in a vehicle called push-push to hazaribagh. it was pushed and pulled by human force over hilly tracts. it was an exciting journey across rivers and through dense forests infested with bandits and wild animals. rabindranath tagore travelled in a push-push along the route in 1885. he recorded the experience in an essay, "chotanagpur families". when the grand chord railway line was opened in 1906, hazaribagh road railway station became the link with the town. for many years, lal motor company operated the rail-cum-bus service between hazaribagh town and hazaribagh road railway station. in 1912, a new province of bihar and orissa was split from bengal province. in 1936, the province was split into separate provinces of bihar and orissa, with the chota nagpur division being a part of bihar. bihar's boundaries remained mostly unchanged after indian independence in 1947. giridih district was created in 1972 by carving some parts of hazaribagh district. after the 1991 census, the district of hazaribagh was divided into three separate districts, hazaribagh, chatra and koderma. the two sub-divisions chatra and koderma were upgraded to the status of independent districts. in 2000, jharkhand was separated from bihar to become india's 28th state. in 2007, ramgarh was separated and made into the 24th district of jharkhand.
hazaribagh town[edit]
the town became a cantonment in 1790, the ramgarh battalion having been raised ten years earlier. it was then part of ramgarh district. it became a district headquarters in 1834. hazaribagh was constituted as a municipality in 1869. the military cantonment, south-east of the town, flourished until 1874, when, after an outbreak of enteric fever in 1874, the troops were mostly withdrawn, except for a small detachment to mind the penitentiary. this resulted in a planned city. this part of the town is known as boddam bazar, after the officer who laid it out. many englishmen settled in hazaribagh during the british period. they built large bungalow-type houses, often with sloping roofs. they were great hunters and hunting stories abounded in the town by word of mouth. most of them left after india became independent. tutu imam topped the list of hunting legends in the town along with prof. rajendra pandey. a century ago it was common for tigers and leopards to prey upon livestock in the outskirts of the town. the town had a population of 15,799 in the 1901 census. it was described in as "little more than a cluster of hamlets, with intervening cultivation, which sprang up around the former military bazar." hazaribagh central jail housed many leaders of the indian freedom movement, including dr. rajendra prasad, later the first president of india. after jayaprakash narayan was put under arrest in this jail during the quit india movement of 1942, he escaped with the help of 53 dhotis (sheets) to cross the wall of the jail. the support he received from the local people is one of the legends of the indian independence movement. during the early years of world war ii, an internment camp ("parole camp") for german civilians was established in the town. in june 1942 it housed 36 women, 5 men and 16 children, of whom 21 females with 13 children were transferred on 25 february 1942 from diyatalawa. in autumn they were transferred to the family camps at purandhar or satara.
early settlers[edit]
a small but effective bengali community including, mukherjee, ghosh and aikats settled at hazaribagh in the 19th century when the area was in bengal presidency and the british administration was looking for people with english education. these families made significant contributions to keep the local education system going. rai bahadur jadunath mukherjee was amongst the most talked about early bengali settlers. he was the first government pleader of hazaribagh so appointed in 1864. he established the hazaribagh brahmo samaj in 1867 by donating his own land. he established the jadunath girls school in 1873 donating his own land (later upgraded jadunath girls high school in 1956 and around 1920, a new school building was built with the initiative of bengali families such as braja kumar niyogi and chanchala niyogi with funds  from various sources such as the estate of raja of ramgarh). rai bhadur jadunath mukherjee  was foremost in establishing the keshav hal and library in the town and was its first president. he was prominent amongst those who established the hazaribagh bongiya durga bari in 1889 in his compound. he provided food for work programme during the 1873-1874 bihar famine. his house hosted a galaxy of great indians such as ramananda chattopadhaya, sanjib chandra chattopadhaya (of "palamau" fame), rabindranath tagore and indira debi. later, scholars such as mahesh chandra ghosh and dhirendranath choudhury made the town their home. the poet kamini roy lived in the town for some years. manmathanath dasgupta, a brahmo missionary spent many years in hazaribagh working amongst the downtrodden. surat kumar gupta contributed towards the development of the town in many ways. doctors such as mandindra bhushan banerjee (panna babu), bikash kumar sen, sambhu nath roy and benoy chandra chatterjee were prominent personalities. the noted bengali author and writer for many hindi films like sujata, subodh ghosh, was born and brought up in hazaribagh. many of his stories are set in the region. keshub chunder sen, the great brahmo leader, accompanied by trailokyanath sanyal, visited hazaribagh in 1874 to recoup his health. he wrote many pieces during his short stay and participated in bhadrotsav celebrations. after his death in 1884, a public hall on the main road was named kesab hall in his memory. amongst the brahmo missionaries who visited hazaribagh regularly was pramathalal sen.
