hazaribagh
Education[edit]
education[edit]

this section contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. please help to clean it up to meet wikipedia's quality standards. where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (march 2022)
the dublin mission has educational institutions and a women's hospital. activities of the mission were started at hazaribagh in 1899, under the aegis of trinity college, dublin, ireland. st. columba's college was one of the oldest in bihar. hazaribagh now has vinoba bhave university within the city limits, named after saint vinoba bhave.  it is the second largest university of jharkhand. it also hosts private university aisect university, jharkhand. st. columba's college, medical college of dhanbad and many engineering and local colleges are affiliated to this university. jajnery institute of technology, hazaribagh is a college for polytechnic, management and it.
after independence, roman catholics established a girls' school, mount carmel school hazaribagh, in 1949. parallel to this reverend father john moore, an australian jesuit missionary, set up st. xavier's school in 1952. vivekananda central school hazaribagh cbse affiliated established in 1992. d.a.v public school hazaribagh, started in 1992 and run by d.a.v college managing committee (new delhi). national public school, hazaribagh, started in 1977, is now affiliated to cbse, it is managed by l.k.c. memorial education society. montfort school, hazaribagh is situated on kanhari hill road. mount litera zee school and kidzee, hazaribagh is located at katgarah village, opposite the firing range, meru, hazaribagh and its city office are situated near the mission hospital. it is a network of zee learn.
hazaribagh has the police training center for the whole of jharkhand. the border security force (bsf) also has a large presence. east india's largest training center is here in the forest with hilly terrain.  the central reserved police force is also present in the town near the lake.
universities[edit]
vinoba bhave university
general colleges[edit]
annada college, hazaribagh bhadrakali college, itkhori g.m.(ghanshyam mehta) evening college, ichak karnpura college, barkagaon k.b. women's college markham college of commerce st. columba's college, hazaribagh vananchal college, tandwa
intermediate colleges[edit]
chhotanagpur inter college, berokala, hazaribagh geeta science inter mahavidyalaya, hazaribagh ghanshyam mehta inter college, ichak, hazaribagh gulmohar inter college, hazaribagh gyan jyoti inter college, hazaribagh inter science college, zabra road, hazaribagh
engineering colleges[edit]
university college of engineering and technology, hazaribagh
medical colleges[edit]
gyan jyoti paramedical & nursing college, hazaribag hazaribag college of dental sciences & hospital, hazaribagh shaheed sheikh bhikhari medical college, hazaribagh
teachers training colleges[edit]
daulat mahto m.t.t. college, banaso, bishnugarh, hazaribagh deo college of education, hazaribagh gautam buddha t.t. college, hazaribagh maa vindhyavashini college of education, hazaribagh s.b.m. t.t. college, hazaribagh sri ram krishna sarda ashram, teachers training college, ravindrapath, hazaribagh swami dharmabandhu college of education, hazaribagh
schools[edit]
angels high school, hazaribagh carmel school hazaribagh d. a. v. public school, hazaribagh, canary hill road delhi public school hazaribagh doon central school, hurhuru. gulmohar public school, badkagaon road, hazaribagh gyanodaya central school, hurhuru jawahar navodaya vidyalaya, bonga, hazaribagh kendriya vidyalaya, hazaribagh montfort school, hazaribagh mount litera zee school, silwar, hazaribagh naman vidya st. augustine's high school, hazaribagh st. stephen's school, hazaribagh st. xavier's school, hazaribagh sangam public school, barkagaon sister nivedita montessori school s.v.n public school, jai prabha nagar, hazaribagh vivekananda central school, rabindra path
