hisar-(city)
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
st. thomas' church c1860
most of the popular indian festivals are celebrated in the city including diwali, dussehra, ram navami, janamashtami, shivratri, lohri, gugga navami, holi, basant panchami, teej and makar sankranti. haryali teej, sankranti, sanjhi, govardhan puja, phag and kartik snan are special festivals of the district. the festivals of jains, christians, sikhs and muslims are also celebrated. sweets are popular, with hansi ka peda being the most popular amongst them. ghoomar is the primary folk dance performed by people during festivals and other occasions and saang is the folk-theatre of the region. classical indian vocalist jasraj and poet vishnu prabhakar belong to hisar.
architecture[edit]
signs of pre-harappan settlements have been found at siswal, lohari ragho and mingni khera in hisar district. one of the four pre-harappan phases has been named sothi-siswal period (3200–2600 bc) on this site. harappa settlements can be found as well in rakhigarhi. the site covers 2180 hectares, making it the largest harappan site known in india and the second-biggest overall after mohenjodaro. all the sites are maintained by archaeological survey of india. agroha is another place of historical importance. it is situated about 24 km from the city and was once the capital of king agrasena, who is believed to have lived during the last stages of dvapara yuga in the mahabharat era. remains of his capital have been excavated, known as agroha mound or locally as ther, and belong to around 3000 bc. the city was also a major centre during the mauryan period as buddhist and jain temples have also been revealed in the excavations.
firoz shah palace complex is another prominent historical site located inside the city. it was built by firuz shah tughlaq in 1354. asigarh fort, a centrally protected monument, was built in 1304–1305. historical places from the british era include st. thomas church and jahaj kothi museum, a jain temple converted to a museum.
