hisar-(city)
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]
banbhori devi is worshipped by local people
balsamand, siswal, banawali, kanwari, and rakhigarhi are some of the sites of indus valley civilisation of now lost ancient drishadvati river flowing through hisar, drishadvati river was a tributary of ancient sarasvati river which still flows as remnant ghaggar-hakra river. historic agroha mound and agroha dham is a prominent religious place located on the outskirts of the city about 22 km away on fatehabad-sirsa-bhatinda road. a local deity banbhori is worshipped by local people. delhi sultanate era firoz shah palace complex and pranpir badshah tomb are located in the city.
the oldest park located in the city is the krantiman park, located across the historic st. thomas church. the park was built in the 19th century and was then known as company bagh. other parks include madhuban park, town park, and o. p. jindal knowledge center. the o. p. jindal knowledge centre, inaugurated in 2009 a museum, library, park and houses a 25-storied, 282-ft- high steel tower (which is one of the tallest structure in hisar city) modeled on the space needle in seattle. haryana rural antique museum, which is maintained by ccs hau in its gandhi bhawan, exhibits evolution of agriculture and vanishing antiques. jahaj kothi museum, named after george thomas, is located inside firoz shah palace complex and maintained by the archaeological survey of india. rakhigarhi indus valley civilisation museum is located at rakhigarhi, which is an indus valley civilisation site 60 km away.
blue bird lake, an artificial lake and tourist complex maintained by the haryana tourism, offers boating and watersports, birding, picnicking,  and recreation. the deer park and shatavar vatika herbal park are located at the outskirts of the city and maintained by the haryana state forest department. it was established in 1971 and endangered species such as blackbuck, chital, sambar, and nilgai can be found here. hisar police lines golf course is located near the hisar airport.
