hoshiarpur
Notable people
notable people
this list only includes notable people from hoshiarpur city, for those born in hoshiarpur district see that article.
politics
sunil arora, 23rd chief election commissioner of india varinder singh bajwa, former member of parliament (rajya sabha) jagjit singh chohan, founder of khalsa raj party santosh chowdhary, ex-mp congress mayawati, m.p. elected unconrested from hoshiarpur  1989 indian general election mangu ram mugowalia, prominent ghadar party leader and freedom fighter avinash rai khanna, a bharatiya janata party leader kanshi ram, founder of bahujan samaj party won election from hoshiarpur in 1996 indian general election vijay sampla, (minister of state for social justice and empowerment) mp for hoshiarpur is from jalandhar. (born at sofi village, jalandhar district) harnam singh saini, an indian revolutionary manmohan singh, (former prime minister of india) studied economics and got his bachelor's and master's degrees in 1952 and 1954 from hoshiarpur city. zail singh, elected from hoshiarpur in 1980 then became union home minister and in 1982 the president of india
business
lakshman das mittal chairman sonalika group of industries.
arts and culture
simran kaur mundi
monica bedi is from the city
intikhab alam, cricketer. monica bedi, a punjabi actress is from village chabbewal kulwinder dhillon, singer from mahilpur harbanse singh doman, belongs to  hoshirarpur harp farmer, an actor, director, producer, photographer was born in hoshiarpur piara singh gill, nuclear physicist shehnaaz gill, actress and singer born in hoshiarpur sahir hoshiarpuri, urdu poet from india habib jalib, pakistani revolutionary poet and left wing politician born on 24 march 1928 in a village near hoshiarpur. hard kaur, indian rapper gauri khan, (born gauri chhibber) belongs to hoshiarpur and raised up in delhi. amanat ali khan, pakistani classic and ghazal singer was born in hoshiarpur munir niazi, (1928–2006) was an urdu and punjabi poet born in khanpur, a village near hoshiarpur amar singh shaunki, dhadi singer d. p. singh, a science populariser and environmental activist of punjab. ganda singh, a punjabi historian mickey singh, singer, songwriter, producer, dancer, model and actor. sahib singh, one of the panj pyare yo yo honey singh, punjabi rapper from delhi was born in hoshiarpur.
army
fazal din, of 7th battalion 10th baluch regiment, british indian army, recipient of victoria cross. tufail mohammad, of punjab regiment (pakistan), recipient of nishan-e-haider
