hosur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
hosur is an industrial hub and houses several automobile and manufacturing industries. major companies include tvs motors, ashok leyland, titan, sundaram clayton, harita seatings, harita fehrer, general electric, kansai nerolac paints, mylan, grb foods, kamaz vectra motors, alstom, faiveley transport, caterpillar inc., carborundum  universal, exide industries ltd, hindustan motors, ion exchange (india) limited, hindustan unilever, schaeffler, ttk prestige, tab india granites pvt ltd, bata shoes, del monte foods, nippon electricals, wendt, toyota boshoku, nilkamal plastics and reckitt benckiser. there are plans for the development of an information technology special economic zone near hosur. elcot has called for applications for the allotment of land in the it park of hosur in the month of june 2010. proximity to bangalore is seen as an advantage. many startup it companies prefer hosur for their initial operations. in december 2019, electric vehicle manufacturer ather energy signed an mou with government of tamil nadu to set up a 400,000 sq ft (37,000 m) manufacturing plant.
a variety of fruits and vegetables are cultivated around hosur. the land is very fertile and there is significant access to fresh water as well as labor. crops consist of tomatoes, cabbages, onions, mangoes, capsicum, carrot, cucumber, beans, coriander leaves, turnips and radish. roses are also grown in large numbers. district livestock farm was started in 1824. central sericultural germplasm resources centre (csgrc) was established in 1991 to protect and conserve mulberry and silkworm germ plasm resources. in july 2019, the government announced the construction of an international flower auction centre with quality control laboratory, cold storage facility, administrative building and an electronic auction hall at a cost of ₹ 202 million. it will deal with flowers cultivated on 3,702 hectares in the district, which are also exported to australia, singapore, and malaysia.
