howrah
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
howrah can be accessed from its many rail links, road links to national highways, as well as its transport connections to kolkata. apart from the bridges connecting the cities, there are also ferry services between various jetties.
rail[edit]
howrah station
howrah junction railway station (more commonly referred to as howrah station) is the major railway station serving howrah, kolkata and the neighbouring districts. it is the second busiest rail station in india, along with being the largest largest railway station in terms of number of platform. it was established in 1854 when a railway line was constructed connecting the city to the coalfields of bardhaman. howrah station serves as a terminal for two railway zones of india: the eastern railway and the south eastern railway, and it is connected to most of the major cities of india. from howrah both eastern railway and south eastern railway operates connecting various stations of the districts of howrah, hooghly, bardhaman, east midnapore and west midnapore. within howrah city itself, there are twelve more stations, the most prominents being santragachi and shalimar.
metro rail[edit]
howrah metro station

see also: kolkata metro line 2
howrah is planned to be served by the kolkata metro line 2 with salt lake in kolkata via a tunnel under river hooghly. on the howrah side, the 2 stations will be at howrah station and howrah maidan. as of february 2022 these stations are under construction.
roads[edit]
the total road length in howrah is approximately 300 km (190 mi). howrah hosts a branch of the grand trunk road – this was built, starting 1804, by the public works department of the british administration. the road starts at the acharya jagadish chandra bose indian botanic garden and connects to the main road near chandannagar. howrah also connects the metropolitan region to the national highways – nh 16 and nh 19, which are connected to vidyasagar setu via the kona expressway.
bridges[edit]
howrah bridge
howrah and kolkata are separated by the hooghly river/ganges and connected by four bridges across the river. these are the:
howrah bridge, also known as rabindra setu vidyasagar setu, also known as the second hooghly bridge vivekananda setu, also known as bally bridge nivedita setu, also known as second bally bridge
the cantilever style howrah bridge and the cable-stayed vidyasagar setu are counted among the longest bridges in the world within their types.
other transport[edit]
there are ferry services available, between various jetties in howrah and kolkata, which was introduced in the 1970s. the jetties on howrah side are at howrah station, ramkrishnapur, shibpur, shalimar, bandhaghat, belur math, bally and nazirganj. howrah is also served by netaji subhas chandra bose international airport, located in dumdum, kolkata.
