hyderabad
Education[edit]
education[edit]

main article: education in hyderabad
osmania university college of arts
public and private schools in hyderabad are governed by the central board of secondary education and follow a "10+2+3" plan. about two-thirds of pupils attend privately run institutions. languages of instruction include english, hindi, telugu and urdu. depending on the institution, students are required to sit the secondary school certificate or the indian certificate of secondary education. after completing secondary education, students enroll in schools or junior colleges with higher secondary facilities. admission to professional graduation colleges in hyderabad, many of which are affiliated with either jawaharlal nehru technological university hyderabad (jntuh) or osmania university (ou), is through the engineering agricultural and medical common entrance test (eam-cet).
there are 13 universities in hyderabad: two private universities, two deemed universities, six state universities, and three central universities. the central universities are the university of hyderabad (hyderabad central university, hcu), maulana azad national urdu university and the english and foreign languages university. osmania university, established in 1918, was the first university in hyderabad and as of 2012 is india's second most popular institution for international students. the dr. b. r. ambedkar open university, established in 1982, is the first distance-learning open university in india.
hyderabad is home to a number of centres specialising in particular fields such as biomedical sciences, biotechnology and pharmaceuticals, such as the national institute of pharmaceutical education and research (niper) and national institute of nutrition (nin). hyderabad has five major medical schools—osmania medical college, gandhi medical college, nizam's institute of medical sciences, deccan college of medical sciences and shadan institute of medical sciences—and many affiliated teaching hospitals. an all india institute of medical sciences has been sanctioned in the outskirts of hyderabad. the government nizamia tibbi college is a college of unani medicine. hyderabad is also the headquarters of the indian heart association, a non-profit foundation for cardiovascular education.
institutes in hyderabad include the national institute of rural development, nalsar university of law, hyderabad (nlu), the indian school of business, the national geophysical research institute, the institute of public enterprise, the administrative staff college of india and the sardar vallabhbhai patel national police academy. technical and engineering schools include the international institute of information technology, hyderabad (iiith), birla institute of technology and science, pilani – hyderabad (bits hyderabad), gandhi institute of technology and management hyderabad campus (gitam hyderabad campus), and indian institute of technology, hyderabad (iit-h) as well as agricultural engineering institutes such as the international crops research institute for the semi-arid tropics (icrisat) and the acharya n. g. ranga agricultural university. hyderabad also has schools of fashion design including raffles millennium international, nift hyderabad and wigan and leigh college. the national institute of design, hyderabad (nid-h), will offer undergraduate and postgraduate courses from 2015.

