hyderabad
Administration[edit]
administration[edit]

main article: administration of hyderabad
common capital status[edit]
telangana legislature
according to the andhra pradesh reorganisation act, 2014 part 2 section 5: "(1) on and from the appointed day, hyderabad in the existing state of andhra pradesh, shall be the common capital of the state of telangana and the state of andhra pradesh for such period not exceeding ten years. (2) after the expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (1), hyderabad shall be the capital of the state of telangana and there shall be a new capital for the state of andhra pradesh."
the same sections also define that the common capital includes the existing area designated as the greater hyderabad municipal corporation under the hyderabad municipal corporation act, 1955. as stipulated in sections 3 and 18(1) of the reorganisation act, city mlas are members of the telangana state assembly.
local government[edit]

see also: administrative divisions of hyderabad
the ghmc is divided into six municipal zones
the greater hyderabad municipal corporation (ghmc) oversees the civic infrastructure of the city, there are six administrative zones of ghmc: south zone–(charminar), east zone–(l. b. nagar), west zone–(serilingampally), north zone–(kukatpally), northeast zone–(secunderabad) and central zone–(khairatabad); these zones consist of 30 "circles", which together encompass 150 municipal wards. each ward is represented by a corporator, elected by popular vote, as of 2020 the city has 7,400,000 voters of which 3,850,000 are male and 3,500,000 are female. the corporators elect the mayor, who is the titular head of ghmc; executive powers rest with the municipal commissioner, appointed by the state government. the ghmc carries out the city's infrastructural work such as building and maintenance of roads and drains, town planning including construction regulation, maintenance of municipal markets and parks, solid waste management, the issuing of birth and death certificates, the issuing of trade licenses, collection of property tax, and community welfare services such as mother and child healthcare, and pre-school and non-formal education. the ghmc was formed in april 2007 by merging the municipal corporation of hyderabad (mch) with 12 municipalities of the hyderabad, ranga reddy and medak districts covering a total area of 650 km (250 sq mi). the secunderabad cantonment board is a civic administration agency overseeing an area of 40.1 km (15.5 sq mi), where there are several military camps. the osmania university campus is administered independently by the university authority. appointed in february 2021, gadwal vijayalakshmi of telangana rashtra samithi (trs) is serving as the mayor of ghmc.
in hyderabad police jurisdiction is divided into three commissionerates: hyderabad (established in 1847 ad, an oldest police commissionerate in india ), cyberabad, and rachakonda, each headed by a commissioner of police, who are indian police service (ips) officers. the hyderabad police is a division of the telangana police, under the state home ministry.
the jurisdictions of the city's administrative agencies are, in ascending order of size: the hyderabad police area, hyderabad district, the ghmc area ("hyderabad city"), and the area under the hyderabad metropolitan development authority (hmda). the hmda is an apolitical urban planning agency that covers the ghmc and its suburbs, extending to 54 mandals in five districts encircling the city. it coordinates the development activities of ghmc and suburban municipalities and manages the administration of bodies such as the hyderabad metropolitan water supply and sewerage board (hmwssb).
hyderabad is the seat of the government of telangana, government of andhra pradesh and the president of india's winter retreat rashtrapati nilayam, as well as the telangana high court and various local government agencies. the lower city civil court and the metropolitan criminal court are under the jurisdiction of the high court. the ghmc area contains 24 state legislative assembly constituencies, which form five constituencies of the lok sabha (the lower house of the parliament of india).
utility services[edit]
a ghmc sweeper cleaning the tank bund road
the hmwssb (hyderabad metropolitan water supply & sewage board) regulates rainwater harvesting, sewerage services, and water supply. in 2005, the hmwssb started operating a 116 km-long (72 mi) water supply pipeline from nagarjuna sagar dam to meet increasing demand. the telangana southern power distribution company limited (tspdcl) manages electricity supply. as of 2014, there were 15 fire stations in the city, operated by the telangana state disaster and fire response department. the government-owned india post has five head post offices and many sub-post offices in hyderabad, which are complemented by private courier services.
pollution control[edit]
hyderabad produces around 4,500 tonnes of solid waste daily, which is transported from collection units in imlibun, yousufguda and lower tank bund to the dumpsite in jawaharnagar. disposal is managed by the integrated solid waste management project which was started by the ghmc in 2010. rapid urbanisation and increased economic activity has led to increased industrial waste, air, noise and water pollution, which is regulated by the telangana pollution control board (tpcb). the contribution of different sources to air pollution in 2006 was: 20–50% from vehicles, 40–70% from a combination of vehicle discharge and road dust, 10–30% from industrial discharges and 3–10% from the burning of household rubbish. deaths resulting from atmospheric particulate matter are estimated at 1,700–3,000 each year. the city's "vip areas", the assembly building, secretariat, and telangana chief minister's office, have particularly low air quality index ratings, suffering from high levels of pm2.5's. ground water around hyderabad, which has a hardness of up to 1000 ppm, around three times higher than is desirable, is the main source of drinking water but the increasing population and consequent increase in demand has led to a decline in not only ground water but also river and lake levels. this shortage is further exacerbated by inadequately treated effluent discharged from industrial treatment plants polluting the water sources of the city.
healthcare[edit]

see also: healthcare in hyderabad
the ntr gardens is among the gardens in the vicinity of hussain sagar lake serving as a recreation park.
the commissionerate of health and family welfare is responsible for planning, implementation and monitoring of all facilities related to health and preventive services. as of 2010–11, the city had 50 government hospitals, 300 private and charity hospitals and 194 nursing homes providing around 12,000 hospital beds, fewer than half the required 25,000. for every 10,000 people in the city, there are 17.6 hospital beds, 9 specialist doctors, 14 nurses and 6 physicians. the city has about 4,000 individual clinics. private clinics are preferred by many residents because of the distance to, poor quality of care at and long waiting times in government facilities, despite the high proportion of the city's residents being covered by government health insurance: 24% according to a national family health survey in 2005. as of 2012, many new private hospitals of various sizes were opened or being built. hyderabad has outpatient and inpatient facilities that use unani, homoeopathic and ayurvedic treatments.
in the 2005 national family health survey, it was reported that the city's total fertility rate is 1.8, which is below the replacement rate. only 61% of children had been provided with all basic vaccines (bcg, measles and full courses of polio and dpt), fewer than in all other surveyed cities except meerut. the infant mortality rate was 35 per 1,000 live births, and the mortality rate for children under five was 41 per 1,000 live births. the survey also reported that a third of women and a quarter of men are overweight or obese, 49% of children below 5 years are anaemic, and up to 20% of children are underweight, while more than 2% of women and 3% of men suffer from diabetes.
