hyderabad
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of hyderabad
toponymy[edit]
the name hyderabad means "haydar's city" or "lion city", from haydar 'lion' and ābād 'city', after caliph ali ibn abi talib, also known as haydar because of his lion-like valour in battle.
the city was originally called baghnagar "city of gardens", and later acquired the name hyderabad. the european travellers von poser and thévenot found both names in use in the 17th century.
one popular legend suggests that the founder of the city, muhammad quli qutb shah, named it bhagya-nagar after bhagmati, a local nautch (dancing) girl whom he married. she converted to islam and adopted the title hyder mahal. the city would have been named hyderabad in her honour.
early and medieval history[edit]
the discovery of megalithic burial sites and cairn circles in the suburbs of hyderabad, in 1851 by philip meadows taylor, a polymath in the service of the nizam, had provided evidence that the region in which the city stands has been inhabited from the stone age. archaeologists excavating near the city have unearthed iron age sites that may date from 500 bce. the region comprising modern hyderabad and its surroundings was ruled by the chalukya dynasty from 624 ce to 1075 ce. following the dissolution of the chalukya empire into four parts in the 11th century, golconda—now part of hyderabad—came under the control of the kakatiya dynasty from 1158, whose seat of power was at warangal—148 km (92 mi) northeast of modern hyderabad. the kakatiya ruler ganapatideva 1199–1262 built a hilltop outpost—later known as golconda fort—to defend their western region.
a 17th century deccani school miniature of qutb shahi ruler abul hasan qutb shah with sufi singers in the mehfil-(“gathering to entertain or praise someone”).
the qutb shahi tombs at ibrahim bagh are the tombs of the seven qutb shahi rulers.
the kakatiya dynasty was reduced to a vassal of the khalji dynasty in 1310 after its defeat by sultan alauddin khalji of the delhi sultanate. this lasted until 1321, when the kakatiya dynasty was annexed by malik kafur, allaudin khalji's general. during this period, alauddin khalji took the koh-i-noor diamond, which is said to have been mined from the kollur mines of golconda, to delhi. muhammad bin tughluq succeeded to the delhi sultanate in 1325, bringing warangal under the rule of the tughlaq dynasty, malik maqbul tilangani was appointed its governor. in 1336 the regional chieftains musunuri nayakas—who revolted against the delhi sultanate in 1333—took warangal under their direct control and declared it as their capital. in 1347 when ala-ud-din bahman shah, a governor under bin tughluq, rebelled against delhi and established the bahmani sultanate in the deccan plateau, with gulbarga—200 km (124 mi) west of hyderabad—as its capital, both the neighboring rulers musunuri nayakas of warangal and bahmani sultans of gulbarga engaged in many wars until 1364–65 when a peace treaty was signed and the musunuri nayakas ceded golconda fort to the bahmani sultan. the bahmani sultans ruled the region until 1518 and were the first independent muslim rulers of the deccan.
in 1496 sultan quli was appointed as a bahmani governor of telangana, he rebuilt, expanded and fortified the old mud-fort of golconda and named the city "muhammad nagar". in 1518, he revolted against the bahmani sultanate and established the qutb shahi dynasty. the fifth qutb shahi sultan, muhammad quli qutb shah, established hyderabad on the banks of the musi river in 1591, to avoid water shortages experienced at golconda. during his rule, he had the charminar and mecca masjid built in the city. mir momin astarabadi, the prime minister in the qutub shahi period, developed the plan of the city of hyderabad, including the location of the charminar and char kaman.
on 21 september 1687, the golconda sultanate came under the rule of the mughal emperor aurangzeb after a year-long siege of the golconda fort. the annexed city "hyderabad" was renamed darul jihad (house of war), whereas its state "golconda" was renamed deccan suba (deccan province) and the capital was moved from golconda to aurangabad, about 550 km (342 mi) northwest of hyderabad.
modern history[edit]
a mill with a canal connecting to hussain sagar lake. following the introduction of railways in the 1880s, factories were built around the lake.
in 1713, mughal emperor farrukhsiyar appointed mubariz khan as governor of hyderabad. during his tenure, he fortified the city and controlled the internal and neighbouring threats. in 1714 farrukhsiyar appointed asaf jah i as viceroy of the deccan—(administrator of six mughal governorates) with the title nizam-ul-mulk (administrator of the realm). in 1721, he was appointed as prime minister of the mughal empire. his differences with the court nobles led him to resign from all the imperial responsibilities in 1723 and leave for deccan. under the influence of asaf jah i's opponents, mughal emperor muhammad shah issued a decree to mubariz khan, to stop asaf jah i which resulted in the battle of shakar kheda. in 1724, asaf jah i defeated mubariz khan to establish autonomy over the deccan, named the region hyderabad deccan, and started what came to be known as the asaf jahi dynasty. subsequent rulers retained the title nizam ul-mulk and were referred to as asaf jahi nizams, or nizams of hyderabad. the death of asaf jah i in 1748 resulted in a period of political unrest as his sons and grandson—nasir jung (1748–1750), muzaffar jang (1750-1751) and salabat jung (1751-1762)—contended for the throne backed by opportunistic neighbouring states and colonial foreign forces. the accession of asaf jah ii, who reigned from 1762 to 1803, ended the instability. in 1768 he signed the treaty of masulipatam—by which the east india company in return for a fixed annual rent, got the right to control and collect the taxes at coromandel coast.
in 1769 hyderabad city became the formal capital of the asaf jahi nizams. in response to regular threats from hyder ali (dalwai of mysore), baji rao i (peshwa of the maratha empire), and basalath jung (asaf jah ii's elder brother, who was supported by french general the marquis de bussy-castelnau), the nizam signed a subsidiary alliance with the east india company in 1798, allowing the british indian army to be stationed at bolarum (modern secunderabad) to protect the state's capital, for which the nizams paid an annual maintenance to the british.
until 1874 there were no modern industries in hyderabad. with the introduction of railways in the 1880s, four factories were built to the south and east of hussain sagar lake, and during the early 20th century, hyderabad was transformed into a modern city with the establishment of transport services, underground drainage, running water, electricity, telecommunications, universities, industries, and begumpet airport. the nizams ruled the princely state of hyderabad during the british raj.
post-independence[edit]
after india gained independence, the nizam declared his intention to remain independent rather than become part of the indian union or newly formed dominion of pakistan. the hyderabad state congress, with the support of the indian national congress and the communist party of india, began agitating against nizam vii in 1948. on 17 september that year, the indian army took control of hyderabad state after an invasion codenamed operation polo. with the defeat of his forces, nizam vii capitulated to the indian union by signing an instrument of accession, which made him the rajpramukh (princely governor) of the state until it was abolished on 31 october 1956.
between 1946 and 1951, the communist party of india fomented the telangana uprising against the feudal lords of the telangana region. the constitution of india, which became effective on 26 january 1950, made hyderabad state one of the part b states of india, with hyderabad city continuing to be the capital. in his 1955 report thoughts on linguistic states, b. r. ambedkar, then chairman of the drafting committee of the indian constitution, proposed designating the city of hyderabad as the second capital of india because of its amenities and strategic central location.
on 1 november 1956 the states of india were reorganised by language. hyderabad state was split into three parts, which were merged with neighbouring states to form maharashtra, karnataka and andhra pradesh. the nine telugu- and urdu-speaking districts of hyderabad state in the telangana region were merged with the telugu-speaking andhra state to create andhra pradesh, with hyderabad as its capital. several protests, known collectively as the telangana movement, attempted to invalidate the merger and demanded the creation of a new telangana state. major actions took place in 1969 and 1972, and a third began in 2010. the city suffered several explosions: one at dilsukhnagar in 2002 claimed two lives; terrorist bombs in may and august 2007 caused communal tension and riots; and two bombs exploded in february 2013. on 30 july 2013 the government of india declared that part of andhra pradesh would be split off to form a new telangana state and that hyderabad city would be the capital city and part of telangana, while the city would also remain the capital of andhra pradesh for no more than ten years. on 3 october 2013 the union cabinet approved the proposal, and in february 2014 both houses of parliament passed the telangana bill. with the final assent of the president of india, telangana state was formed on 2 june 2014.
