hyderabad
Cityscape[edit]
cityscape[edit]
gachibowli it & financial district skyline view
neighbourhoods[edit]

see also: neighbourhoods of hyderabad
optimist and laser dinghies during the hyderabad sailing week regatta at hussain sagar
the historic city established by muhammad quli qutb shah on the southern side of the musi river forms the heritage region of hyderabad called the purana shahar (old city), while the "new city" encompasses the urbanised area on the northern banks. the two are connected by many bridges across the river, the oldest of which is purana pul—("old bridge") built in 1578 ad. hyderabad is twinned with neighbouring secunderabad, to which it is connected by hussain sagar.
many historic and heritage sites lie in south central hyderabad, such as the charminar, mecca masjid, salar jung museum, nizam museum, telangana high court, falaknuma palace, chowmahalla palace and the traditional retail corridor comprising the pearl market, laad bazaar and madina circle. north of the river are hospitals, colleges, major railway stations and business areas such as begum bazaar, koti, abids, sultan bazar and moazzam jahi market, along with administrative and recreational establishments such as the reserve bank of india, the telangana secretariat, the india government mint, the telangana legislature, the public gardens, shahi masjid, the nizam club, the ravindra bharathi, the state museum, the birla temple and the birla planetarium.
north of central hyderabad lie hussain sagar, tank bund road, rani gunj and the secunderabad railway station. most of the city's parks and recreational centres, such as sanjeevaiah park, indira park, lumbini park, ntr gardens, the buddha statue and tankbund park are located here. in the northwest part of the city there are upscale residential and commercial areas such as banjara hills, jubilee hills, begumpet, khairtabad, tolichowki, jagannath temple and miyapur. the northern end contains industrial areas such as kukatpally, sanathnagar, moosapet, balanagar, patancheru and chanda nagar. the northeast end is dotted with residential areas such as malkajgiri, neredmet, a. s. rao nagar and uppal. in the eastern part of the city lie many defence research centres and ramoji film city. the "cyberabad" area in the southwest and west of the city, consisting of madhapur and gachibowli has grown rapidly since the 1990s. it is home to information technology and bio-pharmaceutical companies and to landmarks such as hyderabad airport, osman sagar, himayath sagar and kasu brahmananda reddy national park.
landmarks[edit]
heritage buildings constructed during the qutb shahi and nizam eras showcase indo-islamic architecture influenced by medieval, mughal and european styles. after the 1908 flooding of the musi river, the city was expanded and civic monuments constructed, particularly during the rule of mir osman ali khan (the viith nizam), whose patronage of architecture led to him being referred to as the maker of modern hyderabad. in 2012, the government of india declared hyderabad the first "best heritage city of india".
qutb shahi architecture of the 16th and early 17th centuries followed classical persian architecture featuring domes and colossal arches. the oldest surviving qutb shahi structure in hyderabad is the ruins of the golconda fort built in the 16th century. most of the historical bazaars that still exist were constructed on the street north of charminar towards the fort. the charminar has become an icon of the city; located in the centre of old hyderabad, it is a square structure with sides 20 m (66 ft) long and four grand arches each facing a road. at each corner stands a 56 m (184 ft)-high minaret. the charminar, golconda fort and the qutb shahi tombs are considered to be monuments of national importance in india; in 2010 the indian government proposed that the sites be listed for unesco world heritage status.
among the oldest surviving examples of nizam architecture in hyderabad is the chowmahalla palace, which was the seat of royal power. it showcases a diverse array of architectural styles, from the baroque harem to its neoclassical royal court. the other palaces include falaknuma palace (inspired by the style of andrea palladio), purani haveli, king kothi palace and bella vista palace all of which were built at the peak of nizam rule in the 19th century. during mir osman ali khan's rule, european styles, along with indo-islamic, became prominent. these styles are reflected in the indo-saracenic style of architecture seen in many civic monuments such as the hyderabad high court, osmania hospital, city college and the kacheguda railway station, all designed by vincent esch. other landmark structures of the city constructed during his regin are the state central library, the telangana legislature, the state archaeology museum, jubilee hall, and hyderabad railway station. other landmarks of note are paigah palace, asman garh palace, basheer bagh palace, errum manzil and the spanish mosque, all constructed by the paigah family.
the chowmahalla palace—a principal palace of the nizam's, constructed by salabat jung in 1750
