hyderabad
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]

main article: culture of hyderabad
makkah masjid constructed during the qutb shahi and mughal rule in hyderabad
hyderabad emerged as the foremost centre of culture in india with the decline of the mughal empire. after the fall of delhi in 1857, the migration of performing artists to the city particularly from the north and west of the indian subcontinent, under the patronage of the nizam, enriched the cultural milieu. this migration resulted in a mingling of north and south indian languages, cultures and religions, which has since led to a co-existence of hindu and muslim traditions, for which the city has become noted. a further consequence of this north–south mix is that both telugu and urdu are official languages of telangana. the mixing of religions has resulted in many festivals being celebrated in hyderabad such as ganesh chaturthi, diwali and bonalu of hindu tradition and eid ul-fitr and eid al-adha by muslims.
traditional hyderabadi garb reveals a mix of muslim and hindu influences with men wearing sherwani and kurta–paijama and women wearing khara dupatta and salwar kameez. most muslim women wear burqa and hijab outdoors. in addition to the traditional hindu and muslim garments, increasing exposure to western cultures has led to a rise in the wearing of western style clothing among youths.
literature[edit]
in the past, qutb shahi rulers and asaf jahi nizams attracted artists, architects, and men of letters from different parts of the world through patronage. the resulting ethnic mix popularised cultural events such as mushairas (poetic symposia), qawwali (devotional songs) and dholak ke geet (traditional folk songs). the qutb shahi dynasty particularly encouraged the growth of deccani literature leading to works such as the deccani masnavi and diwan poetry, which are among the earliest available manuscripts in urdu. lazzat un nisa, a book compiled in the 15th century at qutb shahi courts, contains erotic paintings with diagrams for secret medicines and stimulants in the eastern form of ancient sexual arts. the reign of the asaf jahi nizams  saw many literary reforms and the introduction of urdu as a language of court, administration and education. in 1824, a collection of urdu ghazal poetry, named gulzar-e-mahlaqa, authored by mah laqa bai—the first female urdu poet to produce a diwan—was published in hyderabad. hyderabad has continued with these traditions in its annual hyderabad literary festival, held since 2010, showcasing the city's literary and cultural creativity. organisations engaged in the advancement of literature include the sahitya akademi, the urdu academy, the telugu academy, the national council for promotion of urdu language, the comparative literature association of india, and the andhra saraswata parishad. literary development is further aided by state institutions such as the state central library, the largest public library in the state which was established in 1891, and other major libraries including the sri krishna devaraya andhra bhasha nilayam, the british library and the sundarayya vignana kendram.
evening view of the charminar along with other heritage structures and bazaars
music and films[edit]
ravindra bharati an auditorium named after rabindranath tagore.
south indian music and dances such as the kuchipudi and bharatanatyam styles are popular in the deccan region. as a result of their culture policies, north indian music and dance gained popularity during the rule of the mughals and nizams, and it was also during their reign that it became a tradition among the nobility to associate themselves with tawaif (courtesans). these courtesans were revered as the epitome of etiquette and culture, and were appointed to teach singing, poetry, and classical dance to many children of the aristocracy. this gave rise to certain styles of court music, dance and poetry. besides western and indian popular music genres such as filmi music, the residents of hyderabad play city-based marfa music, dholak ke geet (household songs based on local folklore), and qawwali, especially at weddings, festivals and other celebratory events. the state government organises the golconda music and dance festival, the taramati music festival and the premavathi dance festival to further encourage the development of music.
although the city is not particularly noted for theatre and drama, the state government promotes theatre with multiple programmes and festivals in such venues as the ravindra bharati, shilpakala vedika, lalithakala thoranam and lamakaan. although not a purely music oriented event, numaish, a popular annual exhibition of local and national consumer products, does feature some musical performances.
the city is home to the telugu film industry, popularly known as tollywood. in the 1970s, deccani language realist films by globally acclaimed shyam benegal started a movement of coming of age art films in india, which came to be known as parallel cinema. the deccani film industry ("dollywood") produces films in the local hyderabadi dialect, which have gained regional popularity since 2005. the city has hosted international film festivals such as the international children's film festival and the hyderabad international film festival. in 2005, guinness world records declared ramoji film city to be the world's largest film studio.
art and handicrafts[edit]
an 18th century bidriware, water pipe base of hookah, displayed at the los angeles county museum of art
the region is well known for its golconda and hyderabad painting styles which are branches of deccan painting. developed during the 16th century, the golconda style is a native style blending foreign techniques and bears some similarity to the vijayanagara paintings of neighbouring mysore. a significant use of luminous gold and white colours is generally found in the golconda style. the hyderabad style originated in the 17th century under the nizams. highly influenced by mughal painting, this style makes use of bright colours and mostly depicts regional landscape, culture, costumes, and jewellery.
although not a centre for handicrafts itself, the patronage of the arts by the mughals and nizams attracted artisans from the region to hyderabad. such crafts include: wootz steel, filigree work, bidriware, a metalwork handicraft from neighbouring karnataka, which was popularised during the 18th century and has since been granted a geographical indication (gi) tag under the auspices of the wto act; and zari and zardozi, embroidery works on textile that involve making elaborate designs using gold, silver and other metal threads. chintz—a glazed calico textiles was originated in golconda in 16th century. and another example of a handicraft drawn to hyderabad is kalamkari, a hand-painted or block-printed cotton textile that comes from cities in andhra pradesh. this craft is distinguished in having both a hindu style, known as srikalahasti and entirely done by hand, and an islamic style, known as machilipatnam which uses both hand and block techniques. examples of hyderabad's arts and crafts are housed in various museums including the salar jung museum (housing "one of the largest one-man-collections in the world"), the telangana state archaeology museum, the nizam museum, the city museum and the birla science museum.
cuisine[edit]

main article: hyderabadi cuisine
hyderabadi biryani along with other hyderabadi cuisine
hyderabadi cuisine comprises a broad repertoire of rice, wheat and meat dishes and the skilled use of various spices. hyderabad is listed by unesco as a creative city of gastronomy. the hyderabadi biryani and hyderabadi haleem with their blend of mughlai and arab cuisines, carry the national geographical indications tag. hyderabadi cuisine is influenced to some extent by french, but more by arabic, turkish, iranian and native telugu and marathwada cuisines. popular native dishes include nihari, chakna, baghara baingan and the desserts qubani ka meetha, double ka meetha and kaddu ki kheer (a sweet porridge made with sweet gourd).
