ichalkaranji
Education and research[edit]
education and research[edit]
ichalkaranji has around 100 high-schools with 3 international schools, around 20 colleges offering degree-level education in arts, science, and commerce fields, 3 engineering colleges, 1 technical education institute and 1 research institute in engineering. most of the schools and colleges are private and public or "municipal schools" (run by the local municipal council). the schooling system mainly offers maharashtra state board of secondary and higher secondary education as well as other boards such as the national institute of open schooling (nios), central board for secondary education (cbse) and so on. marathi is the main language of instruction followed by english and hindi.
some of them are (alphabetical order) :
the modern high school anantrao bhide vidya mandir antar bharati vidyalaya (आंतरभारती विद्यालय) chate institute d.k.t.e. english medium high school d.k.t.e.marathi medium high school dkte society's international school d.k.t.e.s.'s textile and engineering institute dattajirao kadam arts, science, and commerce college deshbhakt babasaheb khanjire private industrial training institute govindrao high school and junior college ichalkaranji highschool manere highschool and jr. college kabnoor highschool and junior college. mai bal vidya mandir kishor career point (kcp) saraswati high school. shahu high school shraddha institute of career development shri gangamai vidya mandir st. alphonsa school. the modern high school vyankateshwara english school vyankatrao high school
engineering research[edit]
fie research institute – an advanced stage research institute formed to assist the activities of fie and the surrounding engineering goods manufacturing industry in 1979.
approved by govt. of india's department for scientific and industrial research, as an autonomous r & d unit. accredited by national accreditation board for testing and calibration laboratories (nabl), in an accordance with iso/iec 17025. the main objectives of research institute extension of knowledge in the field of natural and applied sciences. conducting experiments with a view to developing new raw materials, processes, components, equipment &machines which are mainly import substitution. improvisation in the existing materials, processes, and machines. encouragement to the activities of the surrounding industries.
medical research[edit]
research on non-laparoscopic abdominal hysterectomy has been done by dr. vijay benadikar, md of the city and he has developed a new modification of the abdominal hysterectomy called "modified mini-pfannenstiel hysterectomy" (non-laparoscopic). he has done more than 600 such procedures in the last 6–7 years. he has been invited and presented this lecture at:
the silver jubilee congress of medical women's international association, held in sydney, australia, in april 2001 south korea (asia pacific menopause federation meet) american association of gynecologic laparoscopists aagl in usa, 2001 and 2002 (the global congress of minimally invasive gynecology)
