ichalkaranji
Spinning[edit]
spinning[edit]
in 1962 the deccan co-operative spinning mill ltd. came into existence in ichalkaranji, which was the first co-operative spinning mill in asia. as of 2010 over 20 modern spinning mills this region has become one of the major centre for spinning mills in india. some of these spinning mills are 100% export oriented units of cotton yarn.
sizing
yarn sizing is a preparatory process before the weaving. this process gives strength to yarn. the city has approximately 175 sizing units, working 24 hours a day, 6 days a week.
engineering industry[edit]
universal testing machine made in ichalkaranji
tata nano small car is very similar to meera, a small car developed in 1970 by shankarrao kulkarni of ichalkaranji. the city is also known for fundamental measuring instrument manufacturing industry. these testing machines are used in engineering and other manufacturing industries, engineering institutes and research institutes for analysis. these measuring instruments are marketed in india as well as in some other countries. measuring instruments manufactured in city by varies companies include compression testing machines, torsion testing machines, horizontal chain, and rope testing machines, spring testing machine, impact testing machine, erichsen testing machines, universal testing machines, rockwell scale hardness tester, brinell scale hardness tester, and computerized vickers hardness test.
the city's economy. driven by the engineering goods manufacturing industry (which has been around since the 1950s). several automotive component manufacturers have the plant's in or around the city, who are vendors for companies such as: maruti udyog ltd, honda motorcycle, bajaj auto, tvs suzuki, kehin fie, tata motors, kirloskar brothers limited, mahindra & mahindra, mico.  emmel vheelers has a manufacturing unit of hybrid three-wheeler, e-motorcycle, high-power scooters, and electric scooters in ichalkaranji.
agriculture[edit]
the city is surrounded by five sugar refinerys, annually they processes over 5000000 metric ton of sugarcane, as of 2009 sugarcane prices of 2600 per ton sugarcane farmers itself bring in approximately rs. 13000000000 (13 billion) to the economy of the city's catchment area. four out of five sugar mills have co-generation plants. the oldest of these five sugar mills is deshbhakta ratnappa kumbhar panchaganga sahakari sakhar karkhana ltd, founded by dr. ratnappa kumbhar, an indian independence activist who signs the final draft of the constitution of india. shree renuka sugars ltd, one of the leading sugar companies in india, has set up a bagasse based 30 megawatt cogeneration power plant in ichalkaranji.
