ichalkaranji
People and culture[edit]
people and culture[edit]
ichalkaranji is also well known for its cultural activities and has a rich cultural heritage. people from different parts of india live in ichalkaranji and celebrates their cultural festivals peacefully. almost all festivals in different religions are celebrated in ichalkaranj especially diwali, ganesh chaturthi, holi, and dasera are the attractions. also, about 15% population being migrated from bikaner, nagour rajasthan, all the major festivals of rajasthan like gan gour, teej, holi are celebrated here with great joy. other festivals like ramnavami, mahesh navami are celebrated with the large participation of all the communities.
ichalkaranji is also a hoe of pandit balakrishnabuwa ichalkaranjikar, pioneer of classical vocal singing in maharashtra. born in 1849, balkrishnabua received his training from pandit vasudeobua joshi, who belonged to the school of haddu-hassu khan. he also received his guidance from ustad mahmed khan, the elder brother of rahimat khan and eldest son of haddu khan. after his training in gwalior, balkrishnabua came to mumbai and the miraj. as the climate of miraj seemed to suit him he desired to settle down there. balkrishnabua's fame began to draw disciples from surrounding places. his disciples included gundubua, vishnu digambar paluskar, mirashi buwa, anant manohar joshi of aundh, nilkanthabua jangam, vamanbua chaphekar, his son annabua ichalkaranjikar, etc. his style of singing was pure gwalior of haddu hassu khan vintage.  his contribution is remarkable in bringing the gwalior gharana gayaki to maharashtra and for popularising it. pandit balakrishnabuwa ichalkaranjikar died in 1926 at the age of 77 years. the city has an art school name after him 'gayanacharya pandit balakrishnabuwa ichalkaranjikar sangeet sadhana mandal', which is devoted to indian classical music hosts cultural programs throughout the year which helps in spreading cultural awareness amongst society.
in 1974 the city of ichalkaranji proudly hosted akhil bharatiya marathi sahitya sammelan, the conference for literary discussions by marathi writers. president of this sahitya sammelan was mr.purushottam laxman deshpande. popularly known by his initials पु. ल. ("pu. la.") a legendary writer and film and stage actor, music composer, harmonium player, singer, and orator.
the city also is a home for the fie foundation, a charitable trust established in 1970, belongs to the 'fie group of industries' in ichalkaranji. the chairman of the fie group, shri p. d. kulkarni, established the 'fie foundation' trust to recognize and reward eminent personalities and budding talents in a variety of fields. the awards are generally selected from the following fields: engineering, science and technology, humanities, education, agriculture, music and arts, sports, literature, child artist, and local talents. the highest award conferred is the rashtrabhushan award. the awards are given annually in a ceremony held in ichalkaranji in january or february. a few of the chief guests who have graced the occasion are honorable ex. prime minister of india shri. chandra shekhar, hon'ble ex. chief minister of maharashtra shri. manohar joshi, cine actor dilip kumar, and industrialist shri rahul bajaj. some of the 'rashtrabhushan' awardees are dr. raja ramanna, ratan tata, lata mangeshkar, t. n. seshan, brijmohan lall munjal and kamal haasan.
medical association of ichalkaranji is a local medico-social service organization of qualified and duly registered medical practitioners of all systems of medicines practicing in ichalkaranji and the outskirts of ichalkaranji. the main aim of this association is to make available medical treatment either free or at minimum cost by establishing charitable institutes like t.b. clinic, t.b. sanitorium, general hospital, alliance hospital, adhar kendra and to organize and develop all socio-medical activities and face local problems unitedly. so the medical association of ichalkaranji came into existence in 1975. activities of association includes, free counselling for underprivileged s, elisa testing for hiv in concessional rate, symptomatic treatment for opportunistic infections, free ante-natal arv treatment to hiv+ve mothers and child, free t.b. treatment to hiv +ve patients, free nirodh (condoms) supply and social awareness.
seva bharati is also one of the ngos of the city, established in 1990 the organization works as a project-based ngo. in the year 1989, the birth centenary year of late hon’ble k. b. hedgewar, the founder of rashtriya swayamsevak sangh, the idea transpired that some work, related to the service of the underprivileged people should be initiated in the city of ichalkaranji. this is the inspiration of seva bharati, ichalkaranji and from 1990 organisation is working in the field of health, education, and related dimensions for the last 20 years. seva bharati has been able to spread its seva initiatives (service) in ichalkaranji city itself and surrounding 12 villages, two of which are from karnataka state.
activities of seva bharati are dr. hedgewar mobile clinic visiting nearby 12 villages, twice a week, treating @ 25000 patients every year. pathological lab, established in 1993, serving for @ 5000 beneficiaries annually at nominal rates. opd registering @ 6000 patients per year. polyclinic having 8 specialist doctors on its panel, each one offering service of checkup and advice once in a week for needy patients. daycare indoor unit 24-hour ambulance service at subsidized rates. blood donation camps. free health camps. nutritious food for the malnourished children in lalnagar slum of ichalkaranji city. free child health checkup camps. rescue and relief work for the victims of earthquakes in killari (dist. latur) in september 1993 and kutch (gujarat) in 2001. relief and rehabilitation work in 2005 and 2006 for the flood-affected people and medical treatment at the time of epidemics in kolhapur district. participation in periodic health campaigns like pulse polio, special health checkup camps for women and general checkup camps.
international clubs such as rotary club, lions club organizing humanitarian service projects every year which are beneficial to the community. sri ramakrishna satsang mandal, ichalkaranji a branch of ramakrishna math, pune is doing humanitarian service projects such as dispensary and tuition classes for school going boys from nearby slum area.
