ichalkaranji
Civic administration[edit]
civic administration[edit]
the civic administration of the city is managed by the ichalkaranji municipal corporation, as per government gr dated on 5 may 2022, which was established as a municipal council in 1904. the municipality oversees the engineering works, health, sanitation, water supply, administration and taxation in the city. it is headed by a municipal president who is assisted by the municipal chief officer and council members. the city is divided into 65 wards and the council members (also known as councilors) are elected by the citizens of ichalkaranji every five years. the citizens directly elect the municipal president. the growth and expansion of the city are managed by the ichalkaranji municipal council which is headed by a municipal chief officer. its activities include developing new layouts and roads, town planning and land acquisition. the electrical supply to the city is managed by the maharashtra state electricity distribution company limited (mahadiscom).
the citizens of ichalkaranji elect one representative, currently mr. prakash kallappa awade,to the maharashtra vidhan sabha through the constituency of ichalkaranji. the 21 letterboxes have been installed in the city by mr. halvankar on 18 july 2010 to communicate with the people of his constituency and address their grievances. he have been receiving numerous complaints and suggestions. in november 2019 the citizens of ichalkaranji reelected mr. prakash awade as their mla, to represent them in vidhan sabha. ichalkaranji city, being a part of the larger hatkanangale lok sabha constituency, also elects one member, fermer mr. raju shetti, to the lok sabha, the lower house of the indian parliament, in office from 2009 to 2019.currently from 2019, mp is dhairyasheel sambhajirao mane from shiv sena.
politics in the city are dominated by three political parties: the indian national congress (inc), the bharatiya janata party (bjp), and the nationalist congress party. city is on the brink of public health and environmental emergency, requiring immediate remedial action.
