ichalkaranji
History[edit]
history[edit]
ichalkaranji was a maratha jhagir situated on the banks of panchganga river (marathi: पंचगंगा नदी). it was ruled by a  ghorpade family for two centuries until 1947. the dynasty of maratha rulers of ichalkaranji has its origin in the middle of the seventeenth century. at that time, a poor brahmin widow, by the surname of joshi, from the coastal konkan village of mhapan, near vengurla, in the present-day sindhudurg district, moved east over the mountainous western ghats with her seven-year-old son, naro mahadeo, to the village of kapshi. the maratha general santaji ghorpade, hailed from that village. naro mahadeo early took a keen interest in the cavalry horses of the general and one day persuaded a syce to allow him to ride a fiery warhorse to the river to drink water. this stolen ride was observed by the alert santaji, who roundly scolded the syce, but also began to take a deep interest in the prodigal boy, who rode so well without any formal training. benefited by the general's personal attention. naro, in turn, served santaji loyally and both developed affection for each other. naro performed heroically and gallantly. as naro mahadeo proved his ability, he was promoted and later on was rewarded with tax collecting fiefs(inams). out of gratitude to his benefactor, naro went on to change his surname from joshi to ghorpade, which to this day is the surname of the dynasty of rulers of ichalkaranji.
venkatrao, the son of naro mahadeo married anubai, the youngest daughter of balaji vishwanath bhat, who very soon became the prime minister or peshwa, of chhatrapati shahu maharaj. because of this alliance with the peshwa family, the rulers of ichalkaranji came into more and more prominence. venkatrao becoming a sardar of shahu maharaj, and receiving additional inams and grants from time to time because of his prowess and great ability as a general, fighting against the forces of kolhapur and portuguese from goa.
as described by horace george franks in the book the story of ichalkaranji (1929), there were ups and downs. but the women of the house of ichalkaranji rulers were always ready to defend and also advance the interests of ichalkaranji with as much courage and shrewdness as the men. an outstanding example of this is anubai, the wife of venkatrao.
narayanrao babasaheb was the eighth ruler. he ascended the seat in the year 1892. his rule was marked with progressive measures in all departments of the administration. as a young man, he had a very well-rounded and advanced education, making it a point to select those subjects which would be of special benefit in administrative affairs. in addition, he had traveled far and wide, visiting java, malay peninsula, ceylon (sri lanka) and burma. he had also visited england and the continent three times. he took a keen interest in the cultural as well as material and social welfare of his people. he patronized the study of art and indian classical music, from basic to the advanced stages, also offering prizes in the art exhibitions at pune and mumbai. he established scholarships in several art colleges of maharashtra and for students going abroad for their professional education. shrimant narayanrao babasaheb was a patron of culture and an enlightened ruler. narayanrao babasaheb ghorpade was responsible for developing the ichalkaranji city into an industrial town. he was the main source of inspiration for the development of both the decentralized textile industry as well as the co-operative movement. he encouraged vitthalrao datar, a young entrepreneur of the town, to install a power loom in 1904. the foresighted ruler gave royal patronage by extending financial assistance as well as free land to the weavers and other enterprising entrepreneurs. during his visit to denmark and other western countries, the chief had access to the co-operative sector of these countries and was impressed with their success. on his return to india, he vowed to exercise this movement for the benefit of his subjects, to reform the microeconomics of the town for prosperity, growth and self-sustainability of the society.
