ichalkaranji
Infrastructure[edit]
infrastructure[edit]
the city has a water supply network in existence since 1873.
indira gandhi memorial hospital: it is a 300-bed hospital with 4 ac operation theaters. the built-up area on ground floor and first floor each 40,000 sq ft (3,700 m). drama theater: shrimant narayanrao babasaheb ghorpade natyagrah. it is the unique theater in western maharashtra. seating capacity for 1200 persons. fully air-conditioned theater. this is the only air-conditioned theater in south-west maharashtra.it can be compared with the "kalidas theatre" in nashik. the plans where prepared by kirloskar consultants, pune. the plot area is about 19,129 . rajaram stadium : work started – 31 january 1987 – work completed – 7 august 2002, cost rs.35,000,000 the cricket ground having a radius of 70 meters. the plans are prepared by pratap achalkar, a well-known architect and ranaji player. ranji trophy matches are played on this ground. the total plot area is about 25436 sqm that with the capacity of auditorium is 20,000 olympic size swimming pool: work started – 16 august 1992 – work completed – 23 december 1998, cost – rs.16,164,017, to encourage the city's swimmers municipal council has constructed an olympic-size swimming pool. state-level swimming tournaments are held every year. maintenance of this swimming pool is done properly by the municipal authority.
textile development cluster : to enhance and improve the infrastructure facilities of the city, municipal council along with ichalkaranji co-operative industrial estate, laxmi co-operative industrial estate, parvati industrial estate, and dkte textile and engineering institute have jointly come together and formed a special purpose vehicle (spv) company viz. "ichalkaranji textile development cluster limited (itdc). the individual members will contribute to the extent of about 50% of the project cost and the balance amount would come in from the grant in aid from the department of industrial promotion and policy, government of india, under the industrial infrastructure up-gradation scheme (iius).
'spv background'
ichalkaranji textile development cluster (itdc), a company, incorporated under the companies act, 1956, is a special purpose vehicle promoted by ichalkaranji to undertake infrastructure development projects under the iius. the main objects of the spv company are:
to form a textile cluster, a local agglomeration of small, medium and large textile and ancillary enterprises, which are engaged in production, marketing range of related and complementary products and services to provide adequate water supply, roads, drainage system, power facilities, common infrastructure facilities such as waste processing plant for textile industries. to develop markets, raw material bank, common processing center, industrial training center, common facility center, communication center, etc. to provide facilities for quality improvement, common testing facilities, research and development to provide fire-fighting facilities, common effluent treatment plant and to promote and develop critical infrastructure facilities for the textile trade, commerce, and industry
