ichalkaranji
Textile Industry Status 2014 To 2019[edit]
textile industry status 2014 to 2019[edit]
₹ 313 billion  sale of the goods and textile industry.the financial year 2014 to 2019.
today 2019 textile industry is ₹ 313 billion  report by, rmt-code (income tax)
approximately 40% of new automobile sales in kolhapur district is from ichalkaranji catchment area. maruti suzuki, tata motors, hero, bajaj, honda and tvs motor have authorized sales and services centers in ichalkaranji. suzuki and yamaha also have their service centers in ichalkaranji.
ichalkaranji is one of the fastest-growing industrial areas in maharashtra and has even been termed the "manchester of maharashtra". having mixed community from all parts of india this is a cosmopolitan town by true means. the city's economy is driven predominantly by the textile industry.engineering is the second largest industry in the city. there is much progressive agriculture in the area surrounding the city. almost all banks in india have a branch in the city. textile goods manufactured in the city are sold all over india as well as exported to various parts of the world. traders use centralized online real-time exchange core banking facility for financial transactions. indian settlement systems such as real-time gross settlement rtgs and national electronic funds transfer neft system is also available in almost all branches of banks in the city. despite all these bankers clearing house in the city processes approximately 12000 cheques on each working day. clearing house is managed by the state bank of india.cts clearing has been started. most of the insurance and companies in india have offices in the city.
textile industry[edit]
ichalkaranji, popular as the 'manchester of maharashtra', has about 25 spinning units with about 1.25 lakh power looms, 20,000 semi-automatic looms and 9,000 shuttle-less looms to run till december 2018, with a daily turnover of nearly ₹10 billion (us$130 million). apart from numerous power and hand processing houses. the town produces one crore meter of yarn every day that translates into a business of rs 45 crore a day. of the total production, 15 percent is directly exported while another 40 percent is for indirect export after processing. according to locals, over 50,000 weavers depend on their livelihood working in the power looms in town.
the weaver community was overwhelmed by the mention of ichalkaranji in the finance minister's speech and welcomed the cluster which, they say, will help them fare better in the global market.
before 1980 ichalkaranji was known for cotton poplin, dhoti, and cotton saris. in the mid-1980s, weavers of the city started producing denim, canvas, chiffon, and fabric for school uniforms (khaki drill). fabrics such as seersucker, oxford, herringbone, ripstop, chambray, tweed, and twill made in or around the ichalkaranji city are used by many domestic and international fashion brands such as raymond's of india, armani, banana republic, hugo boss, and paul smith.
the presence of a qualified workforce and the level of technical know-how and easy accessibility to finest weavers of ichalkaranji for outsourcing and over all good social ambiance were among the factors that influenced italian textile major tessitura monti, turkish textile maker 'soktas', bombay rayon fashions ltd (brfl), raymond zambaiti ltd (a joint venture of raymond's ltd and internationally renowned cotonificio honegger s.p.a., part of gruppo zambaiti), german menswear brands liebe, boys r bad and looty etc. while planning investment near ichalkaranji city.
