indore
Government and politics[edit]
government and politics[edit]
civic administration[edit]

main article: indore municipal corporation
indore has a city government, or municipality, with a mayor-council form of government. in 1870, the first municipality was constituted in indore. and bakshi khajan singh was appointed chairman. indore municipality became the first city to have an elected municipal government responsible for the welfare and growth of the city. in the year 1956, during the reorganization of states, indore was included in madhya pradesh, and later that same year, was declared a municipal corporation.
indore municipal corporation (imc) is spread over an area of 269 square km. the indore municipal corporation (imc) is a unicameral body consisting of 69 council members whose districts are divided into 12 zones and these zones had been further divided into 69 wards defined by geographic population boundaries. in 2014, 29 villages were added into the fold of the municipality. in 2015, 23 more villages were added. after these inclusions, the number of wards went up to 85, and zones 19.
the mayor and councillors are elected to five-year terms. the municipal or local elections to indore municipal corporation were last held in 2015. the next elections were to be held early in 2020, but as per a report from february 2020, these have not happened, although preparation of voter rolls and ward reservation happened later in july. the elected wing of the city government is headed by the mayor and the incumbent mayor is malini gaur. as per a report from the free press journal, indore was notified in 2018 for not having constituted ward committees. the executive wing is headed by pratibha pal, the municipal commissioner of indore, who is also the first female commissioner of the city.
on 8 may 2020, the budget for of ₹ 4,763 crore for 2020–21 was approved for the civic body. major sources of revenue for the municipality include collection of property tax, water tax, rent.
indore municipality follows the guidelines as per the madhya pradesh municipal corporations act 1956, as well as the madhya pradesh municipalities act, 1961. the imc is responsible for public education, correctional institutions, libraries, public safety, recreational facilities, sanitation, water supply, local planning, and welfare services.
representation in parliament and state assembly[edit]
indore city is represented in the parliament through the indore lok sabha constituency, which covers most of the district. in may 2019, shankar lalwani of bharatiya janata party, who is also the chairman of the indore development authority, had been elected as the member of parliament from indore. as per delimitation from 2008, indore city is represented in the state assembly constituency through 5 constituencies, election for which last took place in 2018:
constituency  member of legislative assembly  political party     indore 1  sanjay shukla  indian national congress     indore 2  ramesh mendola  bhartiya janata party     indore 3  akash vijayvargiya  bhartiya janata party     indore 4  malini gaur (mayor)  bhartiya janata party     indore 5  mahendra hardia  bhartiya janata party
law and order[edit]
the indore police, a division of the madhya pradesh police, is under the direct control of department of home affairs. the government of madhya pradesh is the law enforcement agency in indore. indore district is divided into 39 police stations and seven police outposts.
in 2012, it was reported that the police commissionerate system would be implemented in indore, but this did not pan out because of tussle between the ias and ips officers in the state. the bill was proposed again in 2018 and has been criticised by newsclick. the system has not been implemented as of 2020, although there has been talk of it.
as of 4 september 2013, the divisional commissioner is dr pawan kumar sharma. in feb 2020, the new director general of police became vivek johri while ssp indore is harinarayan chari mishra.
judiciary[edit]
indore is also a seat for one of the two permanent benches of madhya pradesh high court with gwalior, the city, its agglomerates, and other 12 districts of western madhya pradesh falls under the jurisdiction of indore high court.
other agencies[edit]

main article: indore development authority
most of the regions surrounding the city are administered by the indore development authority (ida). ida works as an apex body for planning and co-ordination of development activities in the indore metropolitan region (imr) comprising indore and its agglomeration covering an area of 398.72 km (153.95 sq mi). primarily, ida develops new residential areas. during the early stage of development of such areas, the ida is responsible for developing basic infrastructure. once a sizeable number of plots are sold, the area is formally transferred to the imc, which is then responsible for the maintenance of the infrastructure in the area.
the ida consists of two appointed components; the collector of the district, who has executive powers, and the ida board which includes a chairman appointed by government of madhya pradesh, municipal commissioner of indore and five members form town and country planning department, forest department, public health engineering, public works department and mp electricity board who scrutinize the collector's decisions and can accept or reject his budget proposals each year. the role of ida is to implement the master plan for indore prepared by the town and country office, bhopal. the headquarters of the ida is at race course road, indore.
