indore
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

main article: economy of indore
indore is a commercial center for goods and services. as per the official records released by the directorate of economics and statistics (madhya pradesh), the gdp (nominal) of indore district is estimated at rs. 43,356 crores for the year 2016–17. while its per-capita nominal gdp was recorded at inr 1,07,930 in 2016–17. the city also hosts a biennial global investors' summit, which attracts investors from several countries. major industrial areas surrounding the city include: pithampur (phases i, ii and iii alone host 1,500 large, medium and small industrial set-ups), indore special economic zone (around 3,000 acres/ 4.7 square miles/ 1,214 hectares), sanwer industrial belt (1,000 acres/ 1.6 square miles/ 405 hectares), laxmibainagar industrial area, rau industrial area, bhagirathpura industrial area, kali billod industrial area, ranmal billod industrial area, shivajinagar bhindikho industrial area, hatod industrial area.
the city also has it parks, crystal it park (550,000 square feet), pardeshipura it park (100,000 square feet), electronic complex, and individual special economic zones (sezs) such as tcs sez, infosys sez, impetus sez, diamond park, gems and jewelry park, food park, apparel park, namkeen cluster and pharma cluster.
manufacturing of corrugated paper
pithampur near indore is known as the detroit of madhya pradesh.
madhya pradesh stock exchange (mpse) was set up in 1919. it is the only stock exchange in central india and the third oldest stock exchange in india. it is located in indore. the national stock exchange (nse) has established an investor service center in the city.
tcs has officially started an offshore development center in indore with a total campus area of around 1.5 million square feet. collabera has also announced plans to open campuses in indore. infosys is setting up a new development center at indore at an investment of rs. 1 billion in phase i at super corridor. infosys demanded an area of 130 acres (53 hectares) to open its new facility in indore which will employ about 13,000 people. the government of mp has done the land allotment. impetus, headquartered in los gatos, california, usa, with multiple offshore offices in indore, has started operations at its 25-acre land, procured from the sez. besides these, there are several small and medium-sized software development firms in indore. webgility, a san francisco-based ecommerce company that has had a presence in indore since 2007, opened a 16,000 square-foot campus at nrk business park in 2017. accenture has also opened the office in vijay nagar area. nagarro also had the presence in indore.
