indore
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
air[edit]
devi ahilyabai holkar international airport
indore is served by devi ahilyabai holkar international airport, about 8 km from the city. it is the busiest airport in the state of madhya pradesh with 2,269,971 passengers and 10851 tons cargo for april 2017– march 2018. devi ahilyabai holkar international airport, indore has been adjudged as the best airport in the under 2 million annual passenger footfall category in the asia pacific region in the airports council international (aci)'s airport service quality (asq) rankings for the year 2017.
rail[edit]
the indore junction eastern entrance
the indore junction western entrance
the indore junction is an a-1 grade railway station with a revenue of more than rs. 500 million. the station comes under ratlam division of the western railways.
electrification of the indore–dewas–ujjain was completed in june 2012. ratlam–indore broad gauge conversion was completed in september 2014. indore–mhow section was upgraded to broad gauge in 2016 and electrified in 2017.
the city of indore has eight railway stations in addition to the main indore junction:
station name  station code  railway zone  total platforms   lakshmibai nagar  lmnr  western railway  3   saify nagar  sfnr  western railway  1   lokmanya nagar  lmnr  western railway  1   rajendra nagar  rjnr  western railway  2   manglia gaon  mgg  western railway  3   rau  rau  western railway  2   haranya kheri  hkh  western railway  2   dr. ambedkar nagar  mhow  western railway  3   patalpani  mgg  western railway  3
road[edit]
indore is connected to other parts of india through national and state highways.
the national highways passing through the city are:
national highway 52 (nh 52) contains parts of the erstwhile nh3 (ab rd stands for agra bombay road) and it originates at sangrur, punjab and runs through jaipur, rajasthan, indore, dhule and terminates at ankola in karnataka. national highway 47 starts from bamanbore, gujarat and reaches indore via ahmedabad and further connects betul to terminate at nagpur.
the highways which have ceased to exist because of renumbering are:
national highway 3 also known as the agra-bombay road or ab road, was an important highway connecting agra to mumbai via indore & dhule. national highway 59 & its branch nh 59a. nh 59 originated at ahmedabad and passed through godhra, indore, raipur, brahmapur, odisha and terminated at gopalpur-on-sea while nh 59a connected indore & betul.
the state highways passing through the city are:
mp state highway 27 runs from jhalawar in rajasthan, through ujjain, indore, barwaha, burhanpur in madhya pradesh and terminates at malkapur, buldhana in maharashtra. mp state highway 31 (neemuch – ratlam – dhar)
public transport[edit]

main article: indore city bus
indore's city bus transport system runs through 277 km (172 mi) of road with a daily ridership of over 140,000. atal indore city transport services ltd, a ppp scheme operates buses and radio taxis in the city. the buses designated as city bus operate on 64 routes with a fleet of 361 buses, with 421 bus stops. the buses are color-coded into three colors: blue, magenta and orange according to their route.
indore brts (ibus) – indore brts is a bus rapid transit system with 53 air-conditioned buses equipped with services like gps and ivr which are used to track the position of the bus with information displayed on led displays installed at the bus stops.
indore magic (auto rickshaw) – indore auto rickshaw is a magic service for small distance travel. daily approx. 500,000 people travel within the city.
indore metro is a rapid transit system that is currently under construction in its first phase.
indore cable car was announced in january 2021 as another public transport for the city to decongest traffic. it will also be the first cable car in india to run on crowded streets.
