indore
Tourist attractions[edit]
tourist attractions[edit]
kanch mandir
lord hanuman statue at pitra parvat
kanch mandir, literally  'temple of glass', is a famous jain temple in indore, built by sir seth hukumchand jain. its construction began sometime around 1903. khajrana ganesh temple is a pilgrimage center in indore, dedicated to lord ganapati, built during the reign of holkar dynasty. nahar shah vali dargah is the oldest dargah of indore. it is situated in the khajrana area, a little distance away from kalka mata temple.
pita parvat is one of the major point of attraction in indore. the sculpture is made with 8 elements in golden color. it took 125 workers and 7 years to complete the statue of the deity lord hanuman. this huge sculpture has established a temple that has the small deity of lord hanuman for the devotees to worship. lord hanuman is seen sitting in the lap of mother anjani in this temple.
rajwada palace
rajwada palace
rajwada palace is a historical palace in indore city. it was built by the holkars of the maratha empire about two centuries ago. this seven-storied structure is located near the chhatris.
lalbagh palace
lalbagh palace
lalbagh palace is one of the finest buildings built by the holkar dynasty between 1886 and 1921. the interior is beautified with striated italian marble pillars, many chandeliers and classical columns, murals of greek deities, a baroque-cum-rococo dining room, an english-library-style office with leather armchairs, a renaissance sitting room, and a palladian queen's bedroom which was the fashion among many of the late raj-era indian nobility, accompanied by a billiards room. there is imitation of the buckingham palace gates creak at the entrance along with 28-hectare ground, where, near to the palace, stands the statue of queen victoria.
manik bagh
manik bagh palace was built in 1930 when maharajah yashwant rao holkar ii commissioned the construction of the manik bagh ("jewel garden") palace. the architect was eckart muthesius (1904–1989) from germany. the maharaja was at a young age at that time, as was muthesius who was just a couple of years older. the work outside and inside was done in a late art deco and the international style of modern architecture.
yeshwant club
the yeshwant club, established in 1934
the yeshwant club came into existence in 1934 at the behest of late the maharaja tukoji rao iii holkar of indore. the club was established for their son, yuvraj yeshwant rao holkar. spread over 14 acres it is a maratha legacy of the holkar rulers of indore state. initially, the club was opened for maratha royalty, nobility, aristocracy, and the officers (natives and british) of the holkar state. later its doors were opened for the business elites. post-indian independence, the admission criteria were revised according to the changing times. maharani usha devi, the daughter of late maharaja yeshwant rao ii holkar of indore is the chief patron of the club, the honorary chief minister of madhya pradesh being the president of the club.
