indore
Education[edit]
education[edit]
main building of the daly college, founded in 1870, one of the oldest boarding schools in india
hh maharaja sir jayaji rao scindia of gwalior state, general sir henry daly (founder of the daly college), with british officers and maratha nobility (sardars, jagirdars & mankaris) in indore, holkar state, c. 1879.

main article: education in indore
indore is one of the education hubs of india and is the only city to both an indian institute of management and an indian institute of technology.
the daly college, founded in 1870 by general henry daly, is one of the oldest co-educational boarding school in the world, which was established to educate the rulers of the central indian princely states of the 'marathas' and rajputs'. the holkar science college, officially known as government model autonomous holkar science college was established in 1891.
indore is the first city to have both iit (indian institute of technology indore) and iim (indian institute of management indore). indore is home to a range of colleges and schools. indore has a large student population and is a big educational center in central india, it also is the education hub of central india. most primary and secondary schools in indore are affiliated with the central board of secondary education (cbse); however, quite a few numbers of schools are affiliated with icse board, nios board, cbse board, and the state level m.p. board as well.
indian institute of technology indore is one of the most prestigious institutions in the country. started in 2009, iit indore has its 500-acre campus in simrol (28  km from indore city). iit indore has several disciplines including civil engineering, computer science engineering, electrical engineering, mechanical engineering, metallurgy, and material science.
iit indore ranked 15 under the engineering category in the national institute ranking framework. iit indore's central library emphasizes the use of online information resources. the library provides its users access to nearly 3800 electronic journals as well as access to databases such as acm digital library, ieee xplore digital library, science direct, mathscinet, jstor, scifinder, taylor and francis, wiley, and springer. the library also provides air-conditioned and wi-fi enabled reading halls.
raja ramanna centre for advanced technology is a unit of department of atomic energy, government of india, engaged in r&d in non-nuclear front-line research areas of lasers, particle accelerators and related technologies. the centre is situated at the south-western end of the indore, madhya pradesh.the rrcat campus is spread over a 760 hectare on the outskirts of indore city. the campus encompasses
national science day celebrated at rrcat on 25 and 26 february 2017
laboratories, staff housing colony and other basic amenities like school, sports facilities, shopping complex, gardens etc.
devi ahilya vishwavidyalaya, also known as davv (formerly known as university of indore or indore vishwavidyalaya), is a university in indore with several colleges operating under its aegis. it has two campuses within the city, one at takshila parisar (near bhavarkuan square) and another at rabindra nath tagore road, indore. the university runs several departments including institute of management studies, school of computer science & information technology(scsit), (ims), school of law (sol), institute of engineering and technology, davv (iet), educational multimedia research centre (emrc), international institute of professional studies (iips), school of pharmacy, school of energy & environmental studies – one of the primer schools for mtech (energy management), school of journalism and school of futures studies and planning, which runs two mtech courses with specializations in technology management & systems science & engineering, mba (business forecasting), an msc in science & technology communication. the campus houses several other research and educational departments, hostels, playgrounds, and cafes.
the indian institute of soybean research (iisr) (icar, government of india), asia's largest soybean research center, is headquartered in indore. there are 16 laboratories in the facility for different disciplines, including genetic engineering, application of artificial intelligence in image analysis, big data analysis, food processing, agriculture machinery, nanotechnology, biotechnology, remote sensing, and application of iot in agriculture.
situated in the heart of malwa, indore enjoys the status of an "educational and industrial capital of madhya pradesh". to initiate and strengthen agricultural research and development in malwa and nimar regions, the institute of plant industry came into existence in the year 1924. later on, in the year 1959, the government college of agriculture, indore was established with the merger of the erstwhile institute of plant industry (ipi). it was a prestigious campus of jawaharlal nehru krishi vishwa vidyalaya, jabalpur, since 1964. after bifurcation of jawaharlal nehru krishi vishwavidyalaya, jabalpur in 2008 and separate second agricultural university is formed, that is, rajmata vijiyaraje scindia krishi vishwavidyalaya, gwalior now college of agriculture, indore is coming under the juridicition of rvskvv, gwalior.
the shri govindram seksaria institute of technology and science (sgsits), formerly shri govindram seksaria kala bhavan, is a public engineering institution located in indore. it was established in 1952 as a technical institute offering licentiate and diploma courses in engineering. new delhi granted the status of an autonomous institution in 1989. in 2020, it became the first and only madhya pradesh government-funded engineering college in the state to have made its place among the top 250 in the national institutional ranking framework (nirf) ranking released by ministry of human resource development, government of india.
the mahatma gandhi memorial medical college (mgmmc), established in 1878 as the king edward medical school, is one of the oldest government run medical colleges in india. it is attached to tertiary teaching hospitals named maharaja yeshwantrao group of hospitals established in 1955. indore also has two other privately run medical colleges which act as teritary care hospitals, they are saims and index medical college and hospital.
the college of veterinary sciences and animal husbandry, mhow is a constituent college of nanaji deshmukh veterinary science university, jabalpur an autonomous veterinary university in india, and is a pioneer college in the field of veterinary sciences in india. it is one of the oldest veterinary colleges in madhya pradesh and india was founded in 1955 the present building of the college was inaugurated by the first prime minister of india pt.jawahar lal nehru on 12 november 1959.
sri aurobindo institute of medical sciences (saims) is a group of colleges located in indore. it features mohak hitech speciality hospital within the campus.
vibgyor group of schools have a branch in vijay nagar.
