indore
History[edit]
history[edit]
gupta empire (gupta era)[edit]
gupta empire inscription mentions indore as city/town of indrapura in gupta indore copper plate inscription dated 146 gupta era or 465 ce. these are also some of the earliest mentions of indore where the city is mentioned as 'indrapura'. indrapura (modern day indore) was then known for its sun temple, where in 464–65 ce, gupta king skandagupta had made an endowment for the permanent maintenance of the city's sun temple. the temple was constructed by two merchants of the city – achalavarman and bhṛikuṇṭhasiṁha.
an early gupta era inscription from ancient india. this is a photograph of a personal copy of plates published by john fleet in 1888, with inscriptions of the early gupta kings and their successors, as a part of the corpus inscriptionum indicarum series, vol. 3
maratha raj (holkar era)[edit]

main article: holkar
during the mughal era, the area under the modern indore district was equally divided between the administrations (sarkars) of ujjain and mandu. kampel was the headquarters of a mahal (administrative unit) under the ujjain sarkar of malwa subah (province). the area of the modern indore city was included in the kampel pargana (administrative unit).
in 1715, the marathas invaded this region (mughal territory) and demanded chauth (tax) from the mughal amil (administrator) of kampel. the amil fled to ujjain, and the local zamindars agreed to pay chauth to the marathas. the chief zamindar, nandlal chaudhary (later known as nandlal mandloi), paid a chauth of around rs. 25,000 to the marathas. jai singh ii, the mughal governor of malwa, reached kampel on 8 may 1715, and defeated the marathas in a battle near the village. the marathas came back in early 1716, and raided kampel in 1717. in march 1718, the marathas, led by santaji bhonsale, invaded malwa again, but were unsuccessful.
by 1720, the headquarters of the local pargana were transferred from kampel to indore, due to the increasing commercial activity in the city. in 1724, the marathas under the new peshwa baji rao i, launched a fresh attack on the mughals in malwa. baji rao i himself led the campaign, accompanied by his lieutenants udaji rao pawar, malhar rao holkar and ranoji scindia. the mughal nizam met the peshawar at nalchha on 18 may 1724, and acceded to his demand of collecting chauth from the area. the peshwa returned to the deccan, but left malhar rao holkar at indore to oversee the chauth collection.
the marathas maintained friendly relations with nandlal chaudhary, who held influence over the local sardars (chiefs). in 1728, they defeated the mughals decisively at amphora, and consolidated their authority in the area over the next few years. on 3 october 1730, malhar rao holkar was appointed as the maratha chief of malwa. the local zamindars, who had the title of chaudhari, came to be known as mandlois (after mandal, an administrative unit) during the maratha reign. the holkar dynasty of the marathas, which controlled the region, conferred the title of rao raja upon the local zamindar family. after nandlal died, his son tejkarana was accepted as the mandloi of kampel by the peshwa baji rao i. the pargana was formally granted to malhar rao holkar by merging 28 and one-half pargana by the peshwa in 1733. the pargana headquarters were transferred back to kampel during his reign. after his death, his daughter-in-law ahilyabai holkar moved the headquarters to indore in 1766. the tehsil of kampel was converted into indore tehsil by a change in the name. ahilyabai holkar moved the state's capital to maheshwar in 1767, but indore remained an important commercial and military center.
princely state (indore/holkar state)[edit]

main article: indore state

see also: dewas junior, dewas senior, dhar state, and gwalior state
ahalyabai holkar is fondly remembered as a noble, saintly and courageous woman. she ruled the kingdom of indore (which was then part of the wider maratha empire) for several decades. her rule is remembered as a golden age in indore’s history. from an agricultural background herself, she married khande rao, prince of indore. thereafter, she resided in the royal palace. later, she was trained in statecraft and accompanied the army to war on many occasions. at that time the maratha empire (which was founded by shivaji) was at the apex of its power. there were frequent battles and skirmishes, both against foreigners as well as internal feuds. in one such battle in 1754, ahalyabai’s husband was killed. her aged father-in-law (malhar rao) was shattered at the death of his son. he summoned ahalyabai, who he loved deeply, and said: "you are now my son. i wish that you look after my kingdom".malhar rao holkar died in 1766, 12 years after the death of his son khande rao. malhar rao's grandson and khande rao's only son male rao holkar became the ruler of indore in 1766, under ahilya bai's regency , but he too died within few months in april 1767. ahilya bai became the ruler of indore after the death of her son with khande rao. ahilya bai was a great pioneer and builder of hindu temples who constructed hundreds of temples and dharmashalas throughout india. she is specially renowned for refurbishing and reconsecrating some of the most sacred sites of hindu pilgrimage that had been desecrated and demolished in the previous century by the mughal emperor aurangzeb including:
kashi vishwanath temple ayodhya – construction of shri rama temple, sarayu ghat badrinath – construction of shri kedareshwar temple and hari temple, dharamshalas (at rangdachati, bidarchati, vyasaganga, tunganath, pawali), construction of many kundas (at gaurkund, kundachatri), a garden and a kunda of warm water at devprayag, pastoral land for cows dwarka – mohatajkhana, pooja house and donation of some villages to the priests of the dwarkadhish temple kedarnath – dharmashala and kund) omkareshwar – renovation of the temples of mamaleshwar mahadev, amaleshwar and trambakeshwar temples, completing the construction of gauri-somnath temple, construction of a dharmashala & pond, donation of a silver mask for adoration of the shivalinga rameswaram – construction of hanumana temple, shri radha krishna temple, a dharmashala, well & garden and many more.
in 1818, the holkars were defeated by the british during the third anglo-maratha war, in the battle of mahidpur by which the capital was again moved from maheshwar to indore. a residency with british residents was established at indore, but holkars continued to rule indore state as a princely state mainly due to efforts of their dewan tatya jog. during that time, indore has established the headquarters of the british central agency. ujjain was originally the commercial center of malwa. but the british administrators such as john malcolm decided to promote indore as an alternative to ujjain because the merchants of ujjain had supported anti-british elements.
in 1906 electric supply was started in the city, the fire brigade was established in 1909, and 1918, the first master-plan of the city was made by noted architect and town planner, patrick geddes. during the period of maharaja tukoji rao holkar ii (1852–86) efforts were made for the planned development and industrial development of indore. with the introduction of railways in 1875, the business in indore flourished during the reigns of maharaja shivaji rao holkar, maharaja tukoji rao holkar iii and maharaja yeshwant rao holkar.
kashirao (dada saheb) holkar kcsi (knight commander of the order of the star of india), the elder brother of maharaja tukojirao holkar ii, receiving public recognition by the viceroy, lord canning, in open durbar on 14 january 1861       tukoji rao holkar ii, indore, from a drawing by mr. w. carpenter, jun.," from the illustrated london news, 1857       tukoji rao holkar iii, the maharaja of indore (1890-1978) by james lauder, london       investiture of his highness the maharaja yeshwant rao ii holkar bahadur of indore 9 may 1930       ahilyabai holkar 1996 stamp of india
the holkar state darbar (court) was composed of many jagirdars, sardars, istamuradars, mankaris and zamindars.
post-independence[edit]
after india's independence in 1947, holkar state, along with several neighboring princely states, acceded to the indian union. in 1948, with the formation of madhya bharat, indore became the summer capital of the new state. on 1 november 1956, when madhya bharat was renamed/merged into madhya pradesh, the state capital was shifted to bhopal. indore, a city today of nearly 4.5 million (2018) residents, has been transformed from a traditional commercial urban center into the modern dynamic commercial capital of the state.
