jabalpur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
vehicle factory jabalpur (vfj)'s matang truck
the narmada river bringing in freshwater from the vindyachal ranges has developed jabalpur district into an agrarian economy. the land of the narmada basin with its fertile alluvial soil gives good yields of sorghum, wheat, rice, and millet in the villages around jabalpur. important among commercial crops are pulses, oilseeds, cotton, sugar cane, and medicinal crops. the state is poised for a breakthrough in soybean cultivation. in kharif crops occupy 60% and rabi crops 40% area with 71.4% area under food grain production. nearly 59% of landholders are marginal whereas small farmed share 18% of farmland. low literacy rates (35.45%), undulating topography, high percentages of wasteland (13.2%), underdeveloped irrigation potential (23%), low groundwater utilization, a large proportion of rain-fed agriculture (75%), the practice of kharif fallows (3.6%), low cropping intensity (131%), low fertilizer consumption (50 kg/ha), a high proportion of low-value crops, and high numbers of unproductive livestock constrain production in the state.
jabalpur has a variety of industries largely based in mineral substances of economic value found in the district, although the ready-made garments industry is a substantial portion of production in jabalpur.
defence establishments started in the early 20th century. jabalpur has vehicle factory jabalpur, grey iron foundry, gun carriage factory jabalpur and ordnance factory khamaria which belong to the ordnance factories board manufacturing various products for the indian armed forces. the gun carriage factory was started in the year 1904 is well equipped and manufacture gun parts, mounting, shells, and a variety of the other product for war purposes. vehicle factory jabalpur (vfj) was started as a manufacturer of trucks and other defence vehicles. the other two are grey iron foundry (gif) and ordnance factory khamaria (ofk).
armed forces make up a large portion of the city and economy in this city. the city has three regimental centres: grenadiers, jammu and kashmir rifles and the signals regiment. jabalpur is also the army headquarters of madhya pradesh, bihar, chhattisgarh, and orissa. jabalpur is an important divisional headquarters, having eight districts: jabalpur, seoni, mandla, chhindwara, narsimhapur, katni, dindori, balaghat. the jabalpur district has been reconstituted on 25 may 1998. it now has four tehsils jabalpur, sihora, patan, and kundam. jabalpur also has the headquarters of the madhya pradesh state electricity board, homeguards, and many other state and central government offices. there are seven blocks in the district with 1449 inhabited villages, 60 uninhabited, 1209 revenue villages, and 4 forest villages. the presence of several industries in jabalpur bolstered the industrial scenario of the city. however, the industrial growth of the area owes much to the defense establishments and the four ordnance factories.
the presence of the military base and the ordnance factories have improved the infrastructure of the city. this has boosted the industrial development of jabalpur. the important industries in jabalpur are:
readymade garments units poultry/hatchery electrical goods industry sawmills wood cutting industry industries relating to limestone products building materials glassware telephone parts furniture making industry shaw wallace gelatin factory steel structures works cement industries commercial engineers & body builders co limited [cebbco ] tobacco business retail business food processing industry vendors for coca-cola india & parle
the nominal gdp of jabalpur district was estimated at rs. 29,189 crores for the year 2016–17.
information technology and park[edit]
m.p. state electronics development corporation ltd. has set up an i.t. park (techno park) in bargi hills having total area of 60 acres, 22 km from the jabalpur airport. paytm started their operations at jabalpur in 2018.
