jabalpur
Government and public services[edit]
government and public services[edit]

main article: jabalpur municipal corporation
civic administration[edit]
jabalpur covers an area of 263 square kilometres (102 sq mi). the jabalpur municipal corporation (jmc), is charged with governance of the city's civic and infrastructural assets. the corporation has two wings: deliberative and executive. the head of the executive wing is a municipal commissioner who is responsible for the corporation's day-to-day operation and assists the deliberative wing in the decision-making process. the jmc council has one elected representative (corporate) from each ward. council elections, by popular vote, are held every five years. a corporate from the majority party is selected as mayor.
jabalpur contributes one member to the lok sabha. rakesh singh of bharatiya janata party had been elected as the member of parliament in the 2019 lok sabha election. the city sends eight members to the state legislative assembly: four from the city (jabalpur purba, jabalpur uttar, jabalpur cantonment and jabalpur paschim) and four from rural areas of the district. jabalpur is divided into eight zones, each consisting of several wards.
division headquarters[edit]
jabalpur is the divisional headquarters for eight districts: jabalpur, seoni, mandla, chhindwara, narsinghpur, katni, dindori and balaghat. the district, which was reconstituted on 25 may 1998, has seven tehsils:  jabalpur, sihora, patan, majhouli, shahpura, panagar and kundam. the city is the headquarters of the madhya pradesh state electricity board, the home-guards and other state and central-government offices.
military establishments[edit]
the jabalpur cantonment is one of the largest cantonments in india. in addition to the ordnance factories, other organisations present in the city include hq madhya bharat area, the jammu & kashmir rifles regimental centre, the grenadiers regimental centre, 1 signal training centre, college of material management, central ordnance depot, 506 army base workshop, military hospital, hq chief engineer jabalpur zone, military dairy farm, and hq recruiting zone. civilian organisations which are part of the ministry of defence are the cantonment board, controller of defence accounts, defence standardisation cell and the canteen stores department.
