jabalpur
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]

main article: list of tourist attractions in jabalpur
marble-art
jabalpur is an important tourism city in madhya pradesh and central india. notable sites in jabalpur include hanumantal bada jain mandir, jabalpur madan mahal, dhuandhar falls, chausta -yogini, gwarighat and various ghat and marble rocks in bhedaghat, balancing rock near madan mahal fort and the shiv statue at kachnar city. the world-renowned tiger reserves like kanha national park, bandhavgarh national park, and pench national park can be easily visited via jabalpur.
hanumantal bada jain mandir is a 17th-century jain temple that appears like a fortress with numerous shikharas. the temple has 22 shrines (vedis), making it the largest independent jain temple in india.  madan mahal is a fort built by the gondi king madansahi in 1116 which is situated atop a hill in jabalpur. kachnar city in jabalpur is known for a 23-metre-high (76 ft) shiva statue housing a cavern with replicas of shiva lingas from 12 shrines nationwide. the city also houses the rani durgawati museum which was built in 1964 to commemorate rani durgavati. the museum hosts ancient relics, sculptures and a collection of items related to mahatma gandhi. dumna nature reserve park is an ecotourism site open to the public which is located in the jabalpur district. it houses the khandari dam, which is a source of drinking water to the city and has many crocodiles. the bargi dam reservoir near jabalpur is known for boat rides.
tourist attractions in jabalpur also include the boat rides on the narmada river, which is 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) away from the city, specially in moonlight. the journey through narmada reveals the marble rocks, where the river has carved the soft marble, creating a gorge of about 8 km in length, and the dhuandhar falls, which is one of the most visited tourist destinations in jabalpur. lamheta ghaat and tilwara ghaat are well-knownghats on the banks of narmada river. the tilwadeshwar temple is located near the tilwara ghat and it is also the place where gandhi's ashes were immersed.
other tourist destinations near the city include chausath yogini temple, bhedaghat fall, bhadbhada fall, gughra fall, osho amritdham, pisanhari ki madiya which is a historic jain pilgrimage near netaji subhash chandra bose medical college, and nandishwardeep jain temple.
