jaipur
Civic utilities[edit]
civic utilities[edit]
jaipur development authority (jda) is the nodal government agency responsible for the planning and development of jaipur. jaipur also falls under the jaipur district of the state of rajasthan in western india. there are 13 tehsils in the district, which are named jaipur, amer, bassi, chaksu, chomu, mojmabad, jamwa ramgarh, phage, phulera, kotputli, sanganer, shahpura, viratnagar. the total area of the district is 14068 square km.
jaipur municipal corporation is responsible for maintaining the city's civic infrastructure and carrying out associated administrative duties.
electricity in jaipur city is supplied through jaipur vidyut vitaran nigam ltd(jvvnl) by the government of rajasthan. jaipur mc has a fire department wing and there are 11 fire stations, with 50 fire tenders in the state capital. however, with the city is expanding and the population increasing, the existing infrastructure is not sufficient to cater to the city's requirements. jaipur, a tier 2 city, also does not have rescue tenders, used for cutting material, or a turntable ladder (ttl), used for dousing flames from aerial angles without entering the building.
water supply, sewerage and drainage[edit]
the rajasthan government has formed the jaipur water supply and sewerage board (jwssb) for the management of water supply and sewerage services in urban areas of the city. jwssb, an autonomous body, has been constituted under the jwssb ordinance, 2018. it will ensure water supply as per the standards stipulated by the bureau of indian standards, the state pollution control board or rajasthan's public health engineering department (phed). jwssb will be responsible for financing, designing, constructing, altering, repairing, operating, and maintaining various water supply and sewerage schemes. it will also provide meters and carry out commercial services such as meter reading, billing, and revenue collection.
the jaipur development authority has divided the city into four main drainage zones with the northern and central zones draining into the dravyavati river while the western zone drains into the chandler lake and the eastern and southern areas combined drain into the dhundh river. sewerage systems and stps have been constructed accordingly with the installed capacity being 730 km of sewer lines and 442 mld of sewage treatment.
solid waste management[edit]
the corporation has a new solid waste management system that includes door-to-door collection, transportation of garbage in covered vehicles, proper deployment of dustbins, use of modern equipment. the system ensures private investment as well as public participation with a small amount of monthly user charges. the size of the jmc garbage can be kept at a manageable level.
complete sanitation work in 3 zones, namely, hawamahal zone (east), hawamahal (west), motidungari zone, and pratap nagar has been contracted out through national tendering.
