jaipur
Governance and politics[edit]
governance and politics[edit]
rajasthan vidhan sabha
civic administration[edit]
the jaipur municipal corporation (jmc) was established in the year 1994. the area of the municipal corporation is 467 square km and it is governed under the rajasthan municipality act of 1959. the municipal corporation is headed by a mayor.
jmc was recently bifurcated into two municipal corporations, namely greater jaipur municipal corporation and jaipur heritage municipal corporation. originally, the municipality had 91 wards and each ward was represented by an elected member. however, the local self government department of rajasthan divided jaipur into two municipal corporations, namely greater jaipur municipal corporation and heritage jaipur municipal corporation, with 150 and 100 wards each, respectively.
municipal elections of jaipur were held in the year 2014. in 2014 elections, bjp won the majority in civic body elections.  the latest elections is scheduled to be held in october 2020, and had been postponed due to covid-19. however, elections for the 100 wards of jaipur heritage municipal corporation were held on 29 october 2020.
the mayor is the elected representative of the city. the current mayor of jaipur city is vishnu laata. the administration duties are carried out by the municipal commissioner and his group of officials. the municipal commissioner of jaipur is dinesh kumar yadav (ias).
the estimated municipal budget for the year 2019–2020 is ₹215,853. the key revenue sources for jaipur municipality are taxes which include house tax, urban development tax and octroi compensation. along with this it also gains revenue from various fees and user charges. the masterplan for the city 2025 was created by the jaipur development authority.
legislative assembly and state agencies[edit]
jaipur consists of two parliamentary constituencies jaipur and jaipur rural. the political party with a majority in jaipur is the indian national congress. it also has electives from the bjp and inc party.
the jaipur lok sabha constituency comprises eight vidhansabha (legislative assembly) segments, all of which fall partly in jaipur city. mla for hawa mahal is mahesh joshi from inc, mla for vidhyadhar nagar is narpat singh rajvi from bjp, mla for civil lines is pratap singh khachariyavas from inc, mla for kishanpole is amin kagzi from inc, mla for adarsh nagar is rafeek khan from inc, mla for malviya nagar constituency is kalicharan saraf from bjp, mla for sanganer constituency is ashok lahoty from bjp and lastly the mla for bagru is ganga devi from inc.
the jaipur rural lok sabha constituency also comprises eight vidhan sabha segments. there are in the northern outskirts of the jaipur city. mla for kotputli is rajendra singh yadav from inc, mla for viratnagar is indraj gurjar from inc, mla for shahpura is alok beniwal (independent), mla for phulera is nirmal kumawat from bjp, mla for jhotwara is lalchand kataria from inc, mla for amber is satish poonia from bjp, mla for jamwa ramgarh is gopal meena from inc and lastly mla for bansur is shakuntala rawat from inc.
law and order[edit]
the city police in jaipur is under the jurisdiction of the rajasthan state department. the current police commissioner for jaipur city police is mr. anand srivastava. in jaipur city, there is a district and sessions court present. it also has a family court.
