jaipur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
roads[edit]
jaipur is located on national highway no.48 connecting delhi and mumbai. national highway 52 links jaipur with kota and national highway 21 links jaipur with agra. rsrtc operates bus service to major cities in rajasthan, new delhi, uttar pradesh, haryana, madhya pradesh, maharashtra, punjab and gujarat. city buses are operated by jaipur city transport services limited (jctsl) of rsrtc. the service operates more than 400 regular and low-floor buses. major bus depots are located at vaishali nagar, vidyadhar nagar and sanganer.
jaipur brts was approved by the government in august 2006. jaipur brts is managed by jcstl, a special purpose vehicle formed by jaipur development authority and jaipur nagar nigam. in phase i, two corridors have been proposed: a "north-south corridor" from sikar road to tonk road and an "east-west corridor" from ajmer road to delhi road. a section of the north-south corridor from bypass near harmada to pani pech became operational in 2010.
jaipur ring road is a project of jaipur development authority to reduce increasing traffic of jaipur city which connects nh-21 (agra road), nh-48 (ajmer road), nh-52 (tonk road), and nh-52 (malpura road) having a length of 150 km. the 57 km out of 150 km long six-lane jaipur ring road has been completed at a cost of rs. 1217 crore which was inaugurated by sushma swaraj, arun jaitley and nitin gadkari.
bhawani singh road, named after the last maharaja of jaipur which begins from nehru sahkar bhawan and ends at the intersection where birla mandir is situated is one of the most popular roads in the city with notable places like rambagh palace, golf club and jaipur development authority office falling on its path. a similarly named road; bhawani singh lane, serves as a place where the prominent people of jaipur reside. the road also serves as a passage for the offices of companies like etv rajasthan, redington india limited, hal clyde denison, and rajasthan tourism bureau.
rail[edit]
jaipur junction railway station
jaipur is the headquarters of north western railway zone of indian railways.
metro[edit]
jaipur metro
jaipur metro commenced commercial operation on 3 june 2015. phase-1a is operational between mansarovar and chandpole consisting of nine stations namely mansarovar, new aatish market, vivek vihar, shyam nagar, ram nagar, civil line, railway station, sindhi camp and chandpole. the phase-1b was constructed with an estimated cost of ₹97.32 billion ($1.74 billion). it became operational on 23 september 2020.
airport[edit]
jaipur international airport is in sanganer, 12.2 km (8 miles) from the centre. the airport handled 363,899 international and 2,540,451 domestic passengers in 2015–2016. jaipur airport also provides air cargo services. during winter, sometimes flights towards indira gandhi international airport are diverted to jaipur airport due to heavy fog in delhi.
