jaipur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
world trade park, jaipur, is a shopping mall opened in 2012.
as per the official records released by the directorate of economics and statistics (rajasthan), the gdp(nominal) of jaipur district is estimated at inr 1,22,140 crores ($15.8 billion) in 2020–21, with a per-capita gdp of inr 1,41,305. in addition to its role as the provincial capital, educational, and administrative centre, the economy of jaipur is fuelled by tourism, gemstone cutting, the manufacture of jewellery and luxury textiles, and information technology.
three major trade promotion organisations have their offices in jaipur. these are: federation of indian chambers of commerce & industry, (ficci) the phd chamber of commerce and industry (phdcci) and the confederation of indian industry (cii) which has its regional offices here. in 2008, jaipur was ranked 31 among the 50 emerging global outsourcing cities. jaipur stock exchange was one of the regional stock exchanges in india and was founded in 1989 but was closed in march 2015.
jaipur has emerged as a hub of automotive industries. jcb, hero motocorp and robert bosch gmbh have their manufacturing plants in jaipur. chemical manufacturers in the city are aro granite and emami agrotech. national engineering industries have a plant in jaipur.
the city is among top emerging it hubs of india along with ahmedabad, bhubaneswar and kochi. mahindra world city is an integrated business zone in jaipur. it is home to several software and it companies including genpact, appirio, infosys, wipro, icici bank, connexions and deutsche bank. the government of rajasthan have built asia's largest incubator in jaipur – the bhamashah techno hub.
jaipur is a major hub for arts and crafts. it has many traditional shops selling antiques, jewellery, handicrafts, gems, bangles, pottery, carpets, textiles, leather and metal products. jaipur is one of india's largest manufacturers of hand-knotted rugs. jaipur foot, a rubber-based prosthetic leg for people with below-knee amputations, was designed and is produced in jaipur. world trade park jaipur, is a shopping mall in jaipur opened in 2012.
