jalandhar
Transport
transport
by air
the nearest airport is adampur airport, northwest of jalandhar which currently handles only scheduled operation on maiden flights of private carrier spicejet to delhi, mumbai and jaipur. the nearest fully-fledged international airport is sri guru ram dass jee international airport in amritsar. it is second busiest airport in north india, and is connected to other parts of the country by regular flights. several airlines operate flights from abroad, including london stansted, birmingham, dubai, singapore, kuala lumpur and doha. the airport handles as many as 48 flights every week up from the occasional, intermittent ones some years ago.

by rail
direct train service is available for other major cities like mumbai, calcutta, chennai, patna, guwahati, pune, haridwar, varanasi, jaipur, jhansi, gwalior, bhopal and jammu tawi. some prestigious trains that halt in jalandhar city railway station are howrah mail, golden temple mail (frontier mail), new-delhi amritsar shatabdi express, paschim express. now many trains of jammu route are extended up to mata vaishno devi-katra.
jalandhar city railway station is well-connected to other parts of the country, jalandhar city is a major stop between the amritsar-delhi rail link which is serviced by shatabdi express, intercity express, and others
direct service to major cities such as mumbai, calcutta, chennai, patna, guwahati, pune, haridwar, varanasi, jaipur and jammu tawi are available. there are prestigious services such as the howrah mail, golden temple mail (frontier mail), new-delhi amritsar shatabdi express, paschim express.
by road
sheed-e-azam sardar bhagat singh intersatate bus stand, jalandhar
there is one of the largest networks of bus services of punjab at shaheed-e-azam sardar bhagat singh isbt (jalandhar), himachal pradesh, delhi, haryana, pepsu, chandigarh, uttar pradesh, himachal pradesh, jammu & kashmir, uttrakhand, rajasthan state roadways, apart from private operators.
