jamnagar
History[edit]
history[edit]

main articles: nawanagar state and jam sahib
maharaja jamsaheb shri of nawanagar
flag of the princely state of nawanagar
nawanagar was founded by jam rawal in 1540 as the capital of the eponymous princely state. jamnagar, historically known as nawanagar (the new town), was one of the most important and the largest princely states of the jadejas in the saurashtra region.vit was a thirteen-gun salute state.
according to historical records, bahadur shah, sultan of gujarat bestowed upon jam lakhaji twelve villages in recognition of his role in the siege of pawagadh. shortly after he took possession of the villages, jam lakhaji was killed by his cousins, tamachi deda and jam hamir jadeja. his son, jam rawal, murdered his father's killers and became ruler of kutch. the state of kutch was semi-independent from the gujarat sultanate.
hamirji's sons, khengarji and sahibji, served the sultan of gujarat. during a hunt, the brothers saved the sultan from being killed by a lion. as a reward for their valour, the sultan sent an army with them to regain their kingdom. jam rawal prepared for battle after hearing that the two princes were returning to kutch with the imperial army.
goddess ashapuraji, the supreme deity of the jadeja clan of rajputs, appeared to jam rawal in a dream. she told him that although he had broken an oath taken in her name not to kill hamirji, she had refrained from punishing him because he had previously honoured her. she said that jam rawal was no longer to dwell in kutch.
as jam rawal and his entourage marched out of kutch, they attacked and killed tamachi deda, the main conspirator in the murder of jam lakhaji. jam rawal also conquered the town of amran and its dependencies, bestowing the rule of dhrol province on his younger brother hardholji. hardholji died in battle at mithoi near khambhalia, passing the throne to his eldest son jasoji. jam rawal conquered parts of saurashtra and formed his kingdom with 999 villages named halar.
while on a hunting trip in present-day jamnagar, jam rawal's hunting dogs were scared by a hare brave enough to turn on them. jam rawal thought that if this land could breed such hares, the men born here would be superior to other men. as a result, he made this place his capital.
on the seventh day of the bright half of the month of shrawan, v.s.1956 (august 1540) on the banks of the rangmati and nagmati rivers, jam rawal laid the foundation of his new capital and named it nawanagar (new town). after a few centuries, its name changed to jamnagar or the town of the jams.
jamsaib was instrumental in creating the city's modern infrastructure during his reign in the 1920s. jam saheb shri digvijaysinhji ranjitsinhji expanded the city's development in the 1940s when it was part of the princely state of nawanagar.
