jamnagar
Parks and recreation[edit]
parks and recreation[edit]
museums[edit]
the kotha bastion museum contains sculptures, coins, inscriptions, copper plates, and the skeleton of a whale. the museum also has an old well where water is drawn by blowing into a small hole in the floor.
the lakhota museum is in the former lakhota palace. this small museum has a collection of sculptures from the 9th to the 18th centuries, antique weapons, and pottery found in medieval villages from the surrounding area.
parks and gardens[edit]
main gate of jam ranjitsinhji park.
bhuchar mori shahid van[edit]

main article: bhuchar mori
bhuchar mori shahid van is a plateau and historic site about 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) northwest of dhrol in the jamnagar district. the place is known for the battle of bhuchar mori. it has a memorial site and park with a large garden, a play area for children, a small artificial climbing mountain, and a hut-like structure for picnics. the site has a memorial stone to ajaji, a horse-mounted idol. there are wall sculptures representing the war fought between the army of kathiawar (nawanagar state) and the mughal army in july 1591.
gulab kunvarbaa udhyan[edit]
gulab kunvarbaa udhyan is a botanical garden across from the palace ground.
jam ranjitsinhji park[edit]
the municipal corporation of jamnagar has recently developed jam ranjitsinhji park near ranjit sagar dam. the park has a garden with colourful fountains. there are also rides for children.
marine national park[edit]

main article: marine national park, gulf of kutch
marine national park on the gulf of kutch is india's first marine sanctuary. located about 7 kilometres (4.3 mi) from the city centre, the park includes an archipelago of 42 islands noted for their coral reefs and mangroves. the area attracts birds, dolphins, finless porpoises, sea turtles, and tropical fish.
sardar patel amusement park[edit]
sardar patel amusement park was developed by jamnagar municipal corporation(jmc). its biggest attractions are a musical dancing fountain, a rain dance fountain for children, a dance hall for youths, a hall for yoga, and a small auditorium. it also has a variety of rides, garden spaces, and a game arcade zone.
sonapuri[edit]
sonapuri or cremation park is a crematorium located 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) from the city centre. surrounded by a park, the building has statues and murals depicting the story of ramayana and various gods, goddesses, and saints. near the pyres, the installation "sansar chakra" illustrates the stages of life.
