jamnagar
Arts and Culture[edit]
arts and culture[edit]
religion[edit]
religion in jamnagar  religion  percent   hinduism   77.59%   islam   18.99%   jainism   2.51%   others   0.91%
jamnagar has several temples, such as sidhnath mahadev temple, badri kedar nath, nilkanth mahadev temple, and bhid bhanjan mahadev temple near the town hall and the kashi vishwanath temple on the k.v. road. it is also well known for its four marble jain temples: vardhman shah's temple, raisi shah's temple, sheth's temple, and vasupujya swami's temple. all of these temples date to between 1574 and 1622. there are more than 30 jain temples in jamnagar.
the bala hanuman temple on the southeastern side of ranmai lake is known for the continuous chanting of the mantra "sri ram, jai ram, jai jai ram". starting on 1 august 1964, this chant continues for 24 hours a day, earning the temple a place in the guinness book of world records. thousands of devotees visit the temple every year. bholeshwar mahadev temple holds a fair every year on shravani amas. during the holy month of shravana, there are hindu fairs on the dried river banks near bohra hajira.
architecture[edit]
bholeshwar mahadev
bholeshwar mahadev temple[edit]
bholeshwar mahadev temple is approximately 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) away from the village murali of tehsil lalpur. the temple is on the bank of the dhandhar river.
bhujio kotho[edit]
bhujio kotho is on the bank of lakhota lake, near khambhaliya gate. this five-storey monument protected the city during invasions. on the first floor, there were guns placed in each direction. the walls have holes for rifles. the upper floor has awater tank with a dancing peacock on its peak. unfortunately, in an earthquake in 2001 bhujio kotho partially collapsed.
bohra hajira[edit]
the bohra hajira is a white marble mausoleum built by jam rawal in 1540. also known as mazar e badri, it is the resting place of the muslim saint mota bawa. bohra hajira is on the banks of the nagmati and rangmati rivers. the mausoleum is of saracenic style and features intricate carvings.
darbargadh[edit]
darbargadh (maharajah's palace), the old royal residence of jam saheb and the most important historical complex in jamnagar, reflects the fusion of rajput and european styles of architecture. the semi-circular palace complex has several buildings with stone carvings, wall paintings, fretwork jali screens, ornamental mirrors, carved pillars, and sculptures. the exterior walls have carved jharokha balconies in the indian tradition, a carved gate, and venetian-gothic arches. the earthquake in 2001 caused significant damage to darbargadh.
jamnagar trimandir[edit]
jamnagar trimandir is a two-storey structure with a large hall on the ground floor and a temple on the first floor.
khambaliya gate
khambhaliya gate[edit]
wazir meraman khawa built khambhaliya gate in the 17th century. it is one of two remaining city gates from that period.
lakhota palace
lakhota palace[edit]
lakhota palace is located on an island in the middle of lakhota lake. it once belonged to the maharaja of nawanagar. this small fort-like palace has semi-circular bastions, turrets, a pavilion with guard-rooms housing swords, powder flasks, and musket loops. an arched stone bridge with a balustrade connects the lakhota palace with the town.
mota ashapura maa temple[edit]
mota ashapura maa temple is located in the east part of jamnagar where the entrance gate leads into the old city area. the jadeja clan built the temple for its patron goddess, (kuldevi).
pratap vilas palace
saifee tower
shantinath mandir
solarium
navtanpuri dham[edit]
shri navtanpuri dham was founded by nijanand swami shri devchandreji in 1630. previously this holy place was a garden. according to pranami vitak-tradition, shri devchandraji entered the garden and used a khijda tree twig to clean his teeth. he then broke the twig into two pieces that he planted into the ground. over time, the twigs grew into two trees that are still attached to the shrine. due to this legend, the temple is also called khijada mandir.
pratap vilas palace[edit]
pratap vilas palace, built during the rule of his royal highness ranjitsinhji, features european architectural style with indian carvings. it is an imitation of the victoria memorial building in calcutta, but its domes are in the tradition of indian architecture. three of the domes are glass. the palace's columns feature carvings of creepers, flowers, leaves, birds, and animals. the 2001 earthquake caused a costly loss of some damage to its parapets and the separation of some upper walls at the roof level in some corners.
saifee tower[edit]
the architect syedna taher saifuddin built saifee tower in 1922. it features a clock in the central, tallest section of the tower.
shantinath mandir[edit]
the shantinath mandir is southwest of bedi gate in jamnagar. the temple has intricate carvings and walls adorned with murals depicting the lives of jain saints. the floor is made of marble and decorated with distinctive jain patterns in yellow, black, white, and red. shantinatha, a 16th tirthankara in jainism, is the temple's namesake.
solarium[edit]
also known as the ranjit institute of poly-radio therapy, the solarium was designed by french architect jean saidman for jam shri ranjitsinhji. this slowly revolving tower provided full daylong sunlight to treat skin diseases. with the destruction of two similar solaria in france during world war ii, this is probably now the only one of its kind in the world, certainly in asia. because of advancements in medicine and treatment, it is now obsolete and not in working condition.
vardhman shah's temple[edit]
vardhman shah's temple is one of the main jain temples in jamnagar. its shrine is dedicated to adinathji, the first tirthankara of jainism. its construction started in 1612, during the reign of jam jasaji i, and was completed in 1620. in 1622, devotees built 52 small deri or temples around the main building
willingdon crescent[edit]
willingdon crescent was constructed by ranjit singh to replace a slum area. inspired by singh's european travels, it is an arcade of cusped arches, bigger on the ground floor and smaller on the upper storey. it has pilasters on the curving walls and balusters on the parapet. there is a  statue of jam saheb in the center of the crescent. the 2001 gujarat earthquake caused slight damage to this shopping area.
