jamshedpur
Transportation
transportation
tatanagar junction railway station
the tatanagar junction on the chakradharpur railway division of the south eastern railway, is the major railhead of jamshedpur. other railway stations in the city include adityapur, gamharia, kandra and govindpur.
jamshedpur is connected to other parts of india through national and state highways. the major highways are:
national highway 33 (nh-33) touches the city and connects it to mumbai and further joins the nh32, which connects with kolkata, delhi nh-2, nh-33 and nh-6 connects it to kharagpur, kolkata. national highway 18 (nh-18) connects jamshedpur to dhanbad, via bokaro. tata-kandra road connects jamshedpur to kandra via gamahria. marine drive, jamshedpur connects adityapur toll bridge to mango via kadma, sonari through the western corridors of jamshedpur
sonari airport
jamshedpur has a bus station in maango. this bus station have buses which go to other cities like bokaro, dhanbad, ranchi etc. however, now there is a plan to update and rebuild and renovate this bus stand/station.
dhalbhumgarh airport
sonari airport is serving the city at present. it is spread over a 25-acre area in the sonari area of the city. the airport is primarily used for bringing in chartered planes of tata group. in previous days there were flights from jamshedpur to kolkata.
dhalbhumgarh airport is a proposed public airport located at dhalbhumgarh, in the state of jharkhand, india as a greenfield airport for jamshedpur. it will be built on the site of an abandoned world war ii airfield situated 60 km (37 mi) from jamshedpur on nh-33. the old airfield was built around 1942, as an ancillary runway for other airfields in the vicinity that were being built around india's eastern frontier as part of the war effort.
it was one of the airfields used by allied forces to repel the advancing japanese troops and to maintain transport links with china. as the japanese forces came to control shipping in the china sea, seaborne supply routes to china were cut and the difficult 500 km (310 mi) route over the himalayas was increasingly used. the airfield was abandoned after the war. the technical team of the airports authority of india (aai) conducted a survey in 2017 and approved the dhalbhumgarh site for a greenfield airport. the government plans to invest rs 300 crore through aai for the new airport which will have a three-kilometre (1.9 mi) runway. in january 2018, union minister of state for civil aviation jayant sinha announced that the union civil aviation ministry and the jharkhand government would sign a memorandum of understanding (mou) for the construction of dhalbhumgarh airport.
in 2022, it is announced that the sonari airport will start commercial public flights for jamshedpur to bhubaneswar and kolkata.
