jamshedpur
Sports
sports
j.r.d. tata stadium at northern town, jamshedpur
jamshedpur's private clubs provide opportunities for activities, such as golf, tennis, squash, billiards, horseriding and water scootering. jamshedpur fc is an isl team based in jamshedpur. the team is owned by tata steel.
facilities and academies
sporting facilities and academies include:
jrd tata sports complex has an international standard multi-use stadium and an eight-lane mono-synthetic track. it is primarily used for football and athletics but facilities for various other sports including archery, basketball, field hockey, swimming, table tennis, tennis, volleyball, skating, yoga as well as a modern gymnasium, are available at the complex. the stadium hosted the women football competition & archery event of the 34th national games in 2011. keenan stadium hosted its 1st international one day cricket match on 7 december 1983 in which india lost to the touring west indies team. many other international matches have been played here in which india has won only one match against south africa in 1999–2000. tata football academy was started in 1987 to nurture budding indian footballers and raise the standard of indian football. tfa is a football club in jamshedpur, sponsored by tata steel. today, tata football academy is one of the premier football breeding grounds in india. tata archery academy: archery is a sport indigenous to the tribal people of chhotanagpur and santhal pargana. tata steel has pursued and nurtured the local tribals and provided them with facilities and training to bring them up to international competition standards in archery. its students have attributed a lot of fame to the institute by bringing in many medals in national and international competitions. tata steel adventure foundation – bachendri pal, the first indian woman to climb mount everest, is the director of tata steel adventure foundation.
golmuri golf course
jamshedpur has two golf courses—the beldih golf course and the golmuri golf course. both of these courses are at the heart of the city. the biggest is the beldih golf course which is around 6,000 yards. the golmuri golf course although smaller is also challenging. they together hold the annual tata open golf tournament which is an event held under the support of the professional golf tour of india. the tournament was started in 2002. jamshedpur also has the jamshedpur gliding club and the jamshedpur co-operative flying club.
