jamshedpur
Demographics
demographics

see also: population of jharkhand
the skyline of the city of the jamshedpur showing its population
population

see also: list of cities in jharkhand
according to the 2011 census of india, the city of jamshedpur had a population of 629,659, but the jamshedpur urban agglomeration had a population of 1,337,131. the city is designated as a million plus urban agglomeration as per government terminology. males constitute 52.1% of the population and females 47.9%. jamshedpur has an average literacy rate of 89.41% – higher than the national average of 74%. in jamshedpur, 11.5% of the population is under six years of age.
jamshedpur urban agglomeration includes: jamshedpur (industrial town), jamshedpur (nac), tata nagar railway colony (og), mango (nac), jugsalai (m), bagbera (ct), chhota gobindpur (ct), haludbani (ct), sarjamda (ct), gadhra (ct), ghorabandha (ct), purihasa (ct), adityapur (m corp.), chota gamahria (ct) and kapali (ct).
language
the official language is hindi. the second most spoken language is urdu. additionally, in jamshedpur, many east indian languages are spoken, including bengali, magahi, santhali and odia. punjabi is also spoken, as are some south indian languages, such as kannada and tamil.
(for language details see golmuri-cum-jugsalai block#language and religion.)
religion and ethnicity
religion in jamshedpur  (2011)       hinduism   78.67%   islam   14.95%   sikhism   1.12%   christianity   2.24%   jainism   0.16%   buddhism   0.09%   others   2.67%  distribution of religions
hindus form the majority religion in jamshedpur. while muslims, sikhs, and christians form a significant minority. jains and buddhists also live in the city. hindus are found in almost all areas of jamshedpur. muslims are also found in almost all areas of jamshedpur, but many are concentrated in maango, sakchi, and golmuri. most sikhs live in golmuri and sakchi. christians are mostly found in the central part of the city. tribals constitute around 28% of the population, and live in birsanagar, a very large area covering a major part of jamshedpur.
birsanagar - the place where tribals live       sai baba temple - one of the temples in jamshedpur at bistupur       saint joseph's cathedral - a cathedral in jamshedpur
migration
migration is a major reason behind jamshedpur's increase in population and it being multicultural. when jamshedpur was established, many people from bihar, especially muslims, migrated to the city for employment and later settled down there. in jamshedpur many muslims are from bihari cities such as darbhanga and patna. many tamil and kannadigas also settle in the city. many other cities such as dhanbad, ranchi and bokaro, which are in jharkhand, are also filled with many migrants for jobs. while many other local people are also living in jamshedpur, including muslims, many sikhs have also settled in the city. many punjabi refugees are also present in the city at punjabi refugee colony in golmuri.
