jaunpur-uttar-pradesh
History[edit]
history[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (august 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)

further information: sultanate of jaunpur
part of a series on thejaunpur sultanateسلطنت جونپور rulers malik sarwar              1394-1399 malik qaranfal             1399-1402 shamsuddin ibrahim shah   1402-1440 mahmud shah sharqi        1440-1457 bhikhan                   1457-1458 hussain shah sharqi       1458-1479   architecture atala mosque jama mosque, jaunpur lal darwaza mosque   warfare bhojpur (1389-1489) bengal (1415-1420)   historiography tarikh-i-dawudi  vte
billon coin of 32 rattis, issued by ibrahim shah of jaunpur.
earlier the jaunpur district was ruled by the bhar, historically known as sultan, having its historical dates from 1359, when the city was founded by the sultan of delhi feroz shah tughlaq and named in memory of his cousin, muhammad bin tughluq, whose given name was jauna khan. in 1388, feroz shah tughlaq appointed malik sarwar, a eunuch, who is notorious for having been the lover of feroz shah tughlaq's daughter, as the governor of the region. the sultanate was in disarray because of factional fighting for power, and in 1393 malik sarwar declared independence. he and his adopted son mubarak shah founded what came to be known as the sharqi dynasty (dynasty of the east). during the sharqi period the jaunpur sultanate was a strong military power in northern india, and on several occasions threatened the delhi sultanate.
it depicts the elephant citranand attacking another, called udiya, during the mughal campaign against the rebel forces of khan zaman and bahadur khan in 1567.
view at juanpore, on the river gomti (1847)
the jaunpur sultanate attained its greatest height under the younger brother of mubarak shah, who ruled as shams-ud-din ibrahim shah (ruled 1402–1440). to the east, his kingdom extended to bihar, and to the west, to kanauj; he even marched on delhi at one point. under the aegis of a muslim holy man named qutb al-alam, he threatened the sultanate of bengal under shihabuddin bayazid shah.
during the reign of husain shah (1456–76), the jaunpur army was perhaps the biggest in india, and husain decided to attempt a conquest of delhi. however, he was defeated on three successive attempts by bahlul khan lodi. it is a dominant trend in modern historiography of the period that this defeat was a cause of a large number of eunuchs in the military ranks. finally, under sikandar lodi, the delhi sultante was able to reconquer jaunpur in 1493, bringing that sultanate to an end.
the jaunpur sultanate was a major center of urdu and sufi knowledge and culture. the sharqi dynasty was known for its excellent communal relations between muslims and hindus, perhaps stemming from the fact that the sharqis themselves were originally indigenous converts to islam, as opposed to descendants of persians or afghans. jaunpur's independence came to an end in 1480, when the city was conquered by sikander lodhi, the sultan of delhi. the sharqi kings attempted for several years to retake the city, but ultimately failed.
although many of the sharqi monuments were destroyed when the lodis took the city, several important mosques remain, most notably the atala masjid, jama masjid (now known as the bari (big mosque) masjid) and the lal darwaza masjid. the jaunpur mosques display a unique architectural style, combining traditional hindu and muslim motifs with purely original elements. the old bridge over the gomti river in jaunpur dates from 1564, the era of the mughal emperor akbar. the bridge is still being used for transportation. the jaunpur qila, a fortress from the tughlaq era, also remains in good form.
jaunpur district was annexed into british india based on the permanent settlement of 1779, and thus was subject to the zamindari system of land revenue collection.
during the revolt of 1857 the sikh troops in jaunpur joined the indian rebels. the district was eventually reconquered for the british by gurkha troops from nepal. jaunpur then became a district administrative center.
present state[edit]
jaunpur is the district headquarters. the district has 2 lok sabha and 9 vidhan sabha constituencies.
