jhansi
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
the city is connected to other parts of india by railways and major highways.
railways[edit]

main article: jhansi junction railway station
jhansi junction
jhansi has its own division in the north central railway zone of indian railways. it lies on the main delhi-chennai and delhi-mumbai lines. the station code is vglb. trains for every part of the country are available 24*7, the first ever shatabdi express commenced it's journey from new delhi to jhansi jn. each and every trains stops at jhansi jn.
road transport[edit]
jhansi is located at the junction of these national highways: national highway 27 (india) from gujarat to assam; national highway 75 (india) from gwalior to rewa via chhatarpur; national highway 44 (india) from jammu to kanyakumari; and national highway 39 (india). thus, jhansi commands a strategic position in the roadways network as highways in five different directions diverge from it.
the towns and major cities connected to it are datia, gwalior, lalitpur, agra, new delhi, bhopal, allahabad, kanpur, lucknow, babina, orchha, banda, shivpuri, chhatarpur, unnao balaji, and sagar.
air transport[edit]
amy johnson at jhansi in 1932
jhansi airport is a military aviation base built in the british era used by the indian army and political visitors. though there are provisions for private aircraft to land, there are no civil aviation operations. there had been a demand to make it operational for commercial purposes in the 1990s and again in the 2000s. the uttar pradesh government announced the construction of an all new civil aviation base to support tourism in bundelkhand in april 2011. as of 2020, the kanpur airport, located 228 km (142 mi) away, is the nearest major airport to jhansi within the state, though gwalior airport in the neighbouring state of madhya pradesh is the nearest airport being located 102 km (63 mi) from jhansi which has direct flights to delhi, mumbai, indore, bangalore, hyderabad, kolkata, ahemdabad, jammu, pune and chennai.
