jodhpur
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
jodhpur has culturally been known by the name of jodhana by the locals. the city is famous for its food and its popularity can be judged by the fact that one can find sweet shops named "jodhpur sweets" in many cities throughout india. being at the onshore of thar desert, life has been influenced by ways of select nomadic tribes (so-called "gypsy" groups – banjara in hindi – have settled in some parts of the city). jodhpur has distinct cultural identity through its food and is famous for its mirchi bada and mawa kachori.
tourism[edit]
jodhpur's most notable attractions are mehrangarh fort which overlooks upon the city, the blue bylanes of the old city are also an attraction, umaid bhawan palace, jaswant thada, and the ghanta ghar, or clock tower. tourists are also within proximity to mandore garden, kaylana lake and garden, balsamand lake, machia biological park, rao jodha desert rock park, ratanada ganesh temple, toorji ka jhalra, sardar samand lake and palace, masooria hills, veer durgadas smarak (monument, park, and museum), surpura dam and bhim bhadak cave. other attractions of people are at markets of food, antique items, traditional clothes and traditional shoes (also called jodhpuri mojari) held in jodhpur. mahamandira, a temple consecrated to sri jalandharnath, is known for its murals showing ascetics in yoga poses and murals bearing inscriptional records of the dignitaries visiting the shrine which includes charanas, nobles, and the rajas.
tourism in jodhpur    jaswant thada       kaylana lake       cenotaphs at mandore garden       mandore gardens       mahamandir temple       khejarla fort
motion-picture industry[edit]
the city is famous for its charming locations and is often featured in various films, advertisements, music videos, and soaps. the historic buildings and landscapes of the city were featured in a number of movies, including the dark knight rises directed by christopher nolan; baadshaho starring ajay devgn and emraan hashmi, the darjeeling limited starring owen wilson, adrien brody, and jason schwartzman; the fall directed by tarsem singh; hum saath-saath hain directed by sooraj barjatya; veer directed by anil sharma; shuddh desi romance directed by maneesh sharma; i directed by s. shankar, kung fu yoga starring jackie chan, sonu sood, and disha patani; loafer starring varun tej and disha patani; supreme starring sai dharam tej and rashi khanna; and airlift featuring akshay kumar and nimrat kaur. many foreign-language films and series have also been shot in jodhpur, such as buddies in india, which was produced in mandarin and was launched in china in 2017 featuring some indian actors, and even the songs were in hindi.
cuisine[edit]
rajasthani thali
a number of dishes from indian cuisine originated in jodhpur. the city savours a number of food items, but the specialities of the city are pyaaj kachori, mirchi bada and mawa kachori.
