jodhpur
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
the city has well-established rail, road, and air networks connecting it to other major cities of the country.
railways[edit]
jodhpur junction railway station
for experiencing the true magnificence and royal opulence of rajasthan, luxury trains palace on wheels, royal rajasthan on wheels, and maharaja express are run jointly by rajasthan tourism development corporation and indian railways. jodhpur is one of the destinations of both of the trains.
in 2012-13 railway budget,a plan for building a high speed rail corridor between delhi-jodhpur via jaipur and ajmer of 591 km was introduced which later in 2020 was included in hsr by indian railways and government of india and now is in pre-feasibility phase.
in 2013, a plan to start metro train service in jodhpur was proposed by then rajasthan government to decongest the city traffic. however, this proposal is still pending with the state government for its approval.  but in 2021, jodhpur development authority and municipal corporations made a future mobility plan where a 35-km metro line is proposed from iit jodhpur to jaisalmer bypass after year 2030. with another proposed 11 more brts corridors in jodhpur between 2021–2030 to provide public transport to the increasing population before starting metro.
suburban stations around jodhpur:
show zoomed outshow zoomed midshow zoomed inshow alljodhpur
no.  suburban station name  distance(in km)   1  raikabagh palace junction  02   2  bhagat ki kothi railway station  03   3  mahamandir railway station  05   4  basni railway station  06   5  jodhpur cantt railway station  08   6  mandor railway station  10   7  banar railway station  14   8  salawas railway station  16
air[edit]
jodhpur airport
jodhpur airport is one of the prominent airports of rajasthan. it is primarily a military airbase with a civilian enclosure to allow for civilian air traffic. due to jodhpur's strategic location, this airport is regarded as one of the most important ones for the indian air force.
at present,  direct flights from ahmedabad, belgaum, bengaluru, chennai, delhi, hyderabad, indore, kolkata and mumbai to the city are operated by air india indigo, spicejet, vistara and star air. the bill and basic formalities for the long-awaited expansion of the airport were cleared by all the concerned authorities in june 2016, clearing the way for the expansion of the airport in two phases beginning february 2016. after the expansion, morning and evening flights are expected from the city to more cities than presently available, in addition to more airlines coming to and from the city.
road[edit]
jodhpur is connected by road to all major cities in rajasthan and neighboring states, such as delhi, ahmedabad, surat, ujjain, and agra. apart from deluxe and express bus services to cities within the state, rajasthan roadways provides volvo and mercedes benz bus service to delhi, ahmedabad, jaipur, udaipur, and jaisalmer. in 2016, bus rapid transit system jodhpur was launched in the city with low-floor and semi-low-floor buses plying on 6 major routes. jodhpur is connected to the national highway network with three national highways and to the rajasthan state highway network with 10 state highways.jodhpur ring road is under construction encircling jodhpur to reduce vehicular traffic.
national highways passing through jodhpur include:
nh-62, ambala-kaithal-hissar-fatehpur-jodhpur-pali; total length = 690 km nh-112, junction with nh-14 near bar connecting jaitaran-bilara-kaparda-jodhpur-kalyanpur-pachpadra-balotra-tilwara-kher-bagundi-dhudhwa-madhasar-kawas and terminating at its junction with nh 15 near barmer; total length= 343 km nh-114, junction with nh-65 near jodhpur connecting balesar - dechhu and terminating at its junction with nh-15 near pokaran; total length= 180 km
state highways passing through jodhpur are:
sh-19, phalodi (nh 15) to needar via ahu, chadi, pachudi, nagaur, tarneu, khatu kalan, khatu khurd, toshina, kuchaman city, bhuni, maroth, deoli minda, renwal crossing, kaladera; total length = 368 km sh-21, dantiweara to merta city via pipar city, borunda; total length = 97 km sh-28, phalodi (nh 15) to ramji ki gol via deeechu, shergarh, pachpadra, balotra, sindri, guda malani; total length = 259 km sh-58, jodhpur to bheem up to nh 8 via vinakiya, rajola sojat, rendiri, bhaisana, sojat road, kantalia, baban; total length = 142 km sh-61, phalodi (nh 15) to mandal via osian, mathania, jodhpur, khejrali, bhatenda, saradasamand, jadan, marwar junction, auwa, jojawar, kamalighat, devgarh, rajaji ka kareda; total length = 349 km sh-62, bilara to pindwara via sojat, sireeyari, jojawar, bagol, desuri, sadri, sewari; total length = 187 km sh-63, banar to kuchera via bhopalgarh asop; total length = 129 km sh-65, sheo (nh 15) to shergarh via bhiyad, barnawa jagger, patodi, phalsoond; total length = 155 km sh-66, siwana to dhandhaniya (nh 114) via samdari, kalyanpur, mandli rodhawa kalan; total length = 90 km sh-68, dangiyawas (nh 112) to balotra via kakelao, khejarli, guda kakani, luni, dhundhara, rampura, samdari; total length = 131 km
