jodhpur
Education and research[edit]
education and research[edit]

main article: list of universities and higher education colleges in jodhpur
footwear design and development institute, jodhpur
national law university jodhpur
jodhpur national university
educational facilities include:
indian institute of technology jodhpur  is a technical education institute in india, one of the new iits. all india institute of medical sciences jodhpur national law university, jodhpur,  is one of the 17 universities imparting law education (established in 1999). national institute of fashion technology jodhpur is a fashion-design institute (started in 2010). dr. sarvepalli radhakrishnan rajasthan ayurved university is a university in the field of ayurveda. the second university of its kind in india, it was started in 2003. jai narain vyas university (jnvu), formerly known as university of jodhpur, is run by the state government of rajasthan (established in 1962). dr. s.n. medical college, jodhpur (established in 1965). mbm engineering college: the oldest engineering institution in rajasthan, it is now a faculty of engineering and architecture, under jnvu (established in 1951). footwear design and development institute jodhpur is an institute established by the government of india, ministry of commerce and industry for the design and development of footwear, fashion, and leather (started in 2012). indian institute of handloom technology  is one of the five institutes nationwide to provide research, development, and technical education to the handloom industry. sardar patel university of police, security and criminal justice, started in 2013, is a university for research and education in the field of security, policing, and criminal justice. krishi vishwavidyalaya, jodhpur, started in 2013 is an agricultural university for research, education and extension in the field of agricultural sciences & technology for farmer of marwar region.
research[edit]
major research institutes and organizations have been established in the city for promoting research:
arid forest research institute is one of the institutes of the indian council of forestry research and education  working under the ministry of environment and forests,  for carrying out scientific research in forestry to provide technologies to increase the vegetative cover and to conserve the biodiversity in the hot arid and semiarid region of rajasthan, gujarat, and dadara union, and nagar haveli union territory. the campus covers 66 hectares on the new pali road. central arid zone research institute  is a premier organisation of the indian council of agricultural research, an autonomous organization under the department of agricultural research and education, ministry of agriculture, government of india. national institute for implementation research on non-communicable diseases  is one of the 33 permanent institutes of indian council of medical research, which is an autonomous body for the formulation, coordination, and promotion of biomedical research in the country. desert regional centre, zoological survey of india  is the regional arm of the only taxonomic organization in the country involved in the study of all kinds of animals to promote survey, exploration, and research leading to the advancement of zoological study. botanical survey of india is the nodal research organization under ministry of environment and forests for research, exploration, and survey of the flora of india. defence research and development organisation is an organization working under the department of defence research and development of ministry of defence for design and development leading to the production of world-class weapons systems and equipment. regional remote sensing centre  is one of the five centres established under national natural resources management system  by department of space for remote sensing tasks at regional and national levels. mbm engineering college conducts research and has masters and phd programs in branches of engineering by highly experienced faculty. in civil and chemical engineering, national and state projects are performed by this college.
