junagadh
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
established in 1863, junagadh's sakkarbaug zoological garden, also known as the sakkarbaug zoo, is around 210 acre (84 hectares) in size. the zoo provides purebred asiatic lions for the indian and international critically endangered species captive breeding programs. currently, it is the only zoo in the country to house african cheetahs. the zoo also has museum of natural history.
junagadh's many ruling dynasties—such as babi nawabs, vilabhis, kshatraps, mauryas, chudasamas, gujarat sultans—and its religious groups have influenced the architectural syles of junagadh.
buddhist cave in uperkot fort
the junagadh buddhist cave groups, with their intricately carved gateways, chaitya halls, sculptured pillars, and sanctums are classic examples of rock-cut architecture. the chudama rajputs left specimens of their architectural style in nabghan kuvo and adi kadi vav. religious monuments such as the jami masjid remind us of muslim architectural patterns. the ashokan edicts is a classic example of old rock engraving styles. the maqbaras and numerous age-old palaces in junagadh tell the story of its rich historical and architectural past.
about 2 kilometres (1.2 mi) east of junagadh and 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) west of the foot of girnar hill is an edict of emperor ashoka, inscribed on an uneven rock and dating from the 3rd century bc. the ashokan edicts impart moral instructions on dharma, harmony, tolerance, and peace. the rock has a circumference of seven metres (23 ft), a height of ten metres (33 ft), and bears inscriptions in brāhmī script etched with an iron pen.
the people of junagadh celebrate both western and indian festivals. diwali, maha shivaratri, holi, janmastami, muharram, navratri, christmas, good friday, dussera, muharram, and ganesh chaturthi are some of the popular festivals in the city.
the shivaratri mela is organized at the foot of mount girnar (talati) in the month of maha (9th day of the month of maagha). the mela lasts for the next five days. about 500,000 people visit junagadh on this occasion. the girnar parikrama is also organized annually. it starts in the month of kartik and draws 1 to 1.5 million people. people walk the periphery of the girnar hills on foot (about 32 kilometres (20 mi)). muharram is celebrated by muslims. the sej, which belonged to the peers or gurus of the nawabs, has been taken out; and a fair has been organized. apart from these religious and national festivals, junagadh annually celebrates its accession to india on 9 november 1947 as the independence day of the city. 1 may is gujarat day, to celebrate the formation of gujarat state on 1 may 1960.
