kadapa
History[edit]
history[edit]
post classical era (200–800 ad)[edit]
the history of kadapa dates back to the second century bc. the evidences of archaeological survey of india suggest that it started with mourya and satavahana dynasty. and since then it has been under the rule of numerous dynasties including chalukya, cholas and pallava. among all of these dynasties, first one to rule over kadapa was pallava dynasty. pallava kings ruled over the city during the fifth century after penetrating into north of kadapa. after that cholas ruled till the eighth century after defeating pallavas. later banas ruled over kadapa.
era (8th to 18th centuries ad)[edit]
ancient kadapa region part of vijayanagara empire ruled between 1336 - 1646
palkonda hills near kadapa
siddhout fort near kadapa
after banas, rashtrakutas ruled kadapa region among the popular rulers of kadapa was king indra iii, who served during the period of 915 ad. in his period, kadapa gained a lot of power and influence, which declined with his death later. telugu cholas, were the next one to rule kadapa. ambadeva ruled kadapa in the latter half of the 13th century when he established the capital at vallur, which is located at a distance of about 15 km from kadapa.
after the death of ambadeva, the kakatiya king prataparudra ii ruled until the early 14th century. prataparudra was defeated by muslims in the reign of khalji emperor alla uddin. later in the mid-14th century, hindus of vijayanagar dynasty drove the muslims out of warangal and subsequently kadapa and ruled for around two centuries till they were defeated by the gulbarga sultans. the most illustrious ruler during this time was pemmasani thimma nayudu (1422 ce) who developed the region and constructed many tanks and temples here. muslims of golkonda conquered the region in 1594 when mir jumla ii raided gandikota fort and defeated chinna thimma nayudu by treachery. marathas took over the city in 1740 after defeating the nawab of kurnool and cuddapah.
hyder ali and tipu sultan also ruled the city (1784-1792) before it fell in the hands of nizam by the treaty of seringapatam in 1792.
later the british took control of kadapa district in 1800 ce. although the town is an ancient one, it was probably extended by dilazak neknam khan, the qutb shahi commander, who called the extension as "neknamabad". the name "neknamabad" was used for the town for some time but slowly fell into disuse and the records of the 18th century refer to the rulers not as "nawab of kadapa". except for some years in the beginning, kadapa district was the seat of the mayana nawabs in the 18th century. with the british occupation of the tract in 1800 ce, it became the headquarters of one of the four subordinate collectorates under the principal collector sir thomas munro. in 2004, kadapa was recognised as a municipal corporation.
