kaithal
Religious places[edit]
religious places[edit]

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (july 2019) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
anjani teela[edit]
anjani ka tilla
anjani was the name of the mother of lord hanuman. kaithal was earlier known as kapisthal, the abode of monkeys (or monkey god, hanuman).
ancient khandeshwar temple[edit]
this is an ancient temple dedicated to lord shiva.
gyrah rudri shiva temple[edit]
out of 108 shiva temples situated in the city, gyrah-rudri temple is the most famous one of its own kind. legend has it that it is at this place during mahabharata era, arjun had been conferred pashupat astra by praying to lord shiva.
gurudwaras[edit]
gurudwara neem sahib - this gurudwara is located at the dogra gate, near sivan gate on the cheeka pehowa road, kaithal.
this gurudwara is dedicated to the ninth guru, guru tegh bahadur ji. he stopped here on his way from anandpur sahib to delhi. guruji stayed at the site of gurudwara manji sahib. early in the morning, guruji came to this place. after taking a bath at the thandar tirth (also referred to as the dandhar tirth), guru sat in meditation under a neem tree at this place. a large congregation of people who had heard of the guru's arrival gathered there. one amongst them suffered from high fever. guruji gave him the leaves of the neem tree and he was cured. this place then came to be known as neem sahib. all gurpurabs are celebrated here. langar is organised every month on sangrand (the first day of the month in the lunar calendar). a local committee appointed by the shiromani gurdwara prabhandhak committee looks after the management of the gurudwara.
gurudwara topiyon wala - situated in the middle of the city, this is the only gurudwara/temple where guru granth sahib and ramayan are recited together—a unique combination of sikhism & hinduism. gurudwara manji sahib - gurdwara manji sahib is situated in sethan mohalla, near hind cinema. it is near the gita bhavan.
this gurudwara is dedicated to the ninth guru, guru tegh bahadur. guru tegh bahadur, after emancipating the sangat of the malwa region, arrived here from baher. the guru told a carpenter from bahir, named malla, that he wanted to go to kaithal and asked if there was any sikh devotee there. malla replied that there were two houses belonging to banias and one to a sikh there. on reaching kaithal, malla asked guru whose house he would like to go to first. guru replied the one that is nearest. malla took guru to the house o f a fellow carpenter, also named malla, who served the guru with great devotion. pleased with his devotion, the guru told him to light a lamp for 40 days in honour of the guru's darbar and he would be blessed with a son. the carpenter was blessed with a son in due course and he donated this place to the gurudwara. on the request of the banias, guru visited their house for lunch. he blessed the spot by saying that kirtan (singing of devotional songs) would be the norm here. this is the site of the gurudwaras manji sahib. guru spent three days preaching the tenets of sikhism here and then left for village barne. the birth anniversaries of guru nanak dev and guru gobind singh are celebrated with great fervour here.
gurudwara shri patshahi chevin ate nauvin sahib - this gurudwara is situated in the village cheeka, kaithal. cheeka is situated on the patiala kaithal road. guru har gobind and guru tegh bahadur came here.
guru tegh bahadur ji came here while he was going to delhi. when kashmiri pandits came to guru in anandpur sahib and requested to save them from aurangzeb. accepting there request guru to sacrifice his life to save them guru while going to delhi via patiala, guru came here to bhai galora masand. he was jathedar of hansi to hisar. there were followers along with guru who wanted to accompany guru to delhi but guru stopped them and asked them to return. followers requested that they will not be able to live without them. then guru tegh bahadur told them visiting this place will give them the result of having darshan of guru tegh bahadur. it is believed that who so ever will visit this place with devotions his/her wishes will be fulfilled.
gurudwara sahib - this gurudwara is situated in nand singh wala village, kaithal. this village is located at punjab border.
islamic religious places[edit]
tomb of sheikh tayyab
tomb of sheikh tayyab: the 16th-century tomb is situated in kaithal city near railway line. the words 'sheikh' and tayyab' stand for terms 'fakir' (saint) and 'pure' sufi saint shah kamal came to kaithal from bagdad. sheikh tayyab was a disciple and khalifa of baba shah kamal. sheikh tayyab died sometime in the late 16th century ad. it is said that this tomb was constructed by shah sikandar,  mazar of shah sikandar qadri kaithaly the grandson of shah kamal. the tomb is built on a square plan, a popular style of pathan architecture. the roof is surmounted by a bulbous dome and a lotus flower finial rests on an octagonal drum-base.
sheikh tayyab's actual name was lala maidni mal and he was one of the advisors to mughal emperor akbar. he converted to islam at the hands of shah kamal qadri. his descendants from his hindu wife are called "qanugo" and the place where they used to live is called mohalla "qanugoyan" in kaithal. there was a tradition when someone from qanugo used to get married, they used to send one pitcher of sweet drink (sherbet) to sheikh tayyab masjid (also known as masjid of mirrors) and one pitcher to shah kamal shrine.
old picture of masjid of mirrors near sheikh tayyab mazar
mazar of baba shah kamal qadri kaithaly
tomb of shah kamal qadri and shah sikander qadri (baba shah kamal lal dayal):  known as peer baba to visitors, situated near gol market. shah kamal qadri's shrine is well known in sub-continent for the past 450 years. he came from baghdad in the time of mughal emperor akbar.
there was a famine in the times of shah kamal. when he learned of it, he asked to prepare two big pots of special food (dalya). one was prepared by a muslim and the other one was prepared by a hindu brahman. it was announced that people from all over the city can come to eat day and night and take away this dalya to their homes as well. there was a miracle that despite thousands of people eating from this langar, big pots were still filled with food. when famine ended, this food was discontinued.
after that incident, it was a tradition that every year in the month of "sawan" rainy season, on all four thursdays of rainy season, people of every religion prepared this special food "dalya" and sent it to the dargah of baba shah kamal to be distributed among the needy.
