kaithal
Landmarks[edit]
landmarks[edit]
this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (august 2019) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
kaithal fort[edit]
ruins of kaithal fortress, 2007. kaithal fort, which would have been from 1767 to 1843, the seat and residence of royal family of kaithal
kaithal fort after restoration, 2016
there exists the remains of the fort of the bhais, and several muslim tombs of the 13th century and later. the kaithal fort has many gates made by british rulers and used to control the entry of trade goods and other items.
the fort was restored and renovated in 2016 (as seen in pictures). it now forms one of the most visible and important landmarks of kaithal.
tomb of razia sultana[edit]
razia sultana tomb painting
the tomb of razia sultana, who gained the throne of delhi sultanate under the mamluk sultanate, is situated 10 km north-west of the kaithal city in siwan on the kaithal-cheeka-patiala road. it is near the jail constructed nearby by the present administration. she and her husband malik altunia, who was the governor of bhatinda (punjab), were decapitated by the local jat people of the area. it is speculated that she might have been disinterred from kaithal and then reburied at her tomb in delhi.
raziya al-din (1205 in budaun – 13 october 1240), throne name jalâlat ud-dîn raziyâ, usually referred to in history as razia sultana, was the sultan of delhi in india from 1236 to may 1240. like some other muslim princesses of the time, she was trained to lead armies and administer kingdoms if necessary. razia sultan was the only woman ruler of both the sultanate and the mughal period, although other women ruled from behind the scenes. razia refused to be addressed as sultana because it meant "wife or consort of a sultan". she would answer only to the title "sultan."
one of the highest flags of india[edit]
in kaithal a 22-by-14.6-metre (72 by 48 ft) national flag is hoisted 63 metres (207 ft) above the ground in hanuman vatika.
48 kos temples[edit]

main article: 48 kos parikrama of kurukshetra
following two pilgrimage points of kaithal town form part of kurukshetra's 48 kos pariktrama.
vidkyar teerth (vriddh kedaar)[edit]
vriddh kedaar, or vidkyaar as it is popularly known, is an important religious place for hindus. this is one of the several pilgrimages in 48 kos parikrama of kurukshetra. this pilgrimage has been mentioned in the ancient text of vamana purana also. vaman purana said: "kapisthaleti vikhyatam sarvapatakanashanam yasmina sthitaha swayam devovridha kedara samgjijitaha" (2) (translation: the destroyer of all devilish deeds, the famous kapisthala sanctum is here because lord vridhakedara himself resides in it.) the vridhakedara sanctum changed to "vidkyara" as a result of the philological principle of "mukhasukha", or ease of speaking. it is located near pehowa chowk, the central point of kaithal.
shree gyarah rudri mandir[edit]
it is one of the famous temples of city, where divine eleven rudra were placed long ago. the temple is known for its art, architecture, beautiful scriptures and large area. a large statue of hanuman complements the beauty of this temple.
