kakinada
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
the economy of the city depends mainly on agriculture, fishing and industrial sectors. paddy, coconut are agro products from the city. the majority of the industrial sector is covered edible oil refineries, fertilizers and natural gas. during the late 1940s (around the time of indian independence) there was little industry in or around kakinada; the local economy was based on agriculture and fishing. until the early 1980s (before the fertilizer companies began operation), the local economy revolved around the textile industry, auto parts, steel-related ancillary units, agriculture and fishing.
kakinada port[edit]
hope island, about 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) from the coast, makes kakinada port a natural harbour. it is home to two ports namely, an anchorage port and a deep-water port ( and also third port is going to be constructed in ksez which will be greenfield seaport ). kakinada's deep-water port is the second-largest in the state (after visakhapatnam port) and the first in the country to be built in a public-private partnership, in 1996 it is operated by kakinada seaports. before the deep-water port was built, the anchorage port was the largest of india's 40 minor ports.
kakinada's principal exports include seafood (prawns, shrimp, fish) and related products, agricultural products (including rice and corn), oilmeals, processed food products, chemicals, iron ore, bauxite powder and biofuel. imports include chemicals, edible oils and agricultural products (including wheat and sugar).
industrial sector[edit]
a number of industries and edible oil refineries, and serves as a base for a thriving oil and gas industry for the state of andhra pradesh are established at kakinada.
agro−products[edit]
coconuts are exported by several companies in and around kakinada. the murugappa group-owned eid parry (india) and cargill international joint venture, silk road sugars, has a port-based stand-alone sugar refinery in kakinada with a capacity of 600,000 tonnes.,
edible oil refineries and biofuel plants[edit]
in 2002, several edible-oil refineries were established in kakinada, with a refining capacity of 3,000 tons per day; they include acalmar oils and fats (taken over by adani wilmar), ruchi infrastructure and nikhil refineries. the port facilitates the importation of crude palm and soybean oil.
vakalapudi industrial park has attracted over $10 million in investment from biodiesel companies such as reliance industries, natural bioenergy and universal bio fuel. andhra pradesh has entered into an agreement with reliance industries for jatropha planting. the company selected 200 acres (81 ha) of land in kakinada to grow jatropha for quality biodiesel fuel.
information technology[edit]
kakinada is a tier-ii city. software technology parks of india (stpi) established a facility here in 2007. since then, several it companies have come up in the city, mainly due to its educated workforce available in the city.
nearly, 35 software and it companies are operating from kakinada. some of the notable software companies include cyient, avineon, krify, primesoft etc.
an it association by the name "godavari it association of east and west godavari districts" (gita) which an association of it companies in the twin godavari districts is formed in 2008 which is based in the city. since 2016, gita is merged with "it association of andhra pradesh" (itaap) forming a separate chapter called itaap godavari chapter.
resources[edit]
power generation[edit]
there are several power plants in and around kakinada. spectrum power generation has a 208-mw plant and was one of the first independent power producers in the country. the company is planning to expand its capacity to 1350 mw in phases. tenders for a 350-mw expansion have been requested. a 220-mw power station (being expanded to 2400 mw at a cost of rs 100 billion) owned by reliance energy and a 464-mw combined-cycle power plant by gvk group are in operation at samalkota (kakinada rural). these plants supply electricity to the state's transmission utility, ap transco, under a power purchase agreement.
natural gas and petroleum[edit]
kakinada is the base for oil and natural gas corporation's eastern offshore asset. several oil companies use kakinada for oil and gasoline shipments. baker hughes and schlumberger are field-development companies working on offshore natural-gas fields near the city. the krishna godavari basin is considered the largest natural gas basin in india. significant discoveries of oil and natural gas were made by oil and natural gas corporation (ongc), gujarat state petroleum corporation and reliance, which has been extracting gas from its kg d6 block off the kakinada coast. reliance has an onshore terminal in gadimoga, about 25 kilometres (16 mi) from kakinada, to process and distribute gas to other parts of the country. reliance gas transportation infrastructure (rgtil) has built a 1,440-kilometre (890 mi) pipeline from kakinada to bharuch (gujarat) to transport 120 million cubic meters per day (mcmd) of natural gas from the krishna-godavari fields (owned by reliance industries) across india to its west coast.
in 2010, the petroleum and natural gas regulatory board awarded kakinada's gas-distribution project to bhagyanagar gas, a consortium of gail and hindustan petroleum. construction is underway to supply gas to kakinada and the surrounding towns of samalkot, peddapuram and pithapuram, making kakinada the second city in andhra pradesh to have a piped gas supply for domestic, commercial and industrial purposes.
