kakinada
Education[edit]
education[edit]
main article: list of educational institutions in kakinada

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (december 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
jntu kakinada main gate
the primary and secondary school education is imparted by the government, aided and private schools of the school education department of the state. the medium of instruction followed by different schools are english and telugu.
kakinada is an educational hub, meeting the growing educational demands of the state. several professional colleges in and around the city offer courses in engineering, medicine, information technology and management at the graduate and postgraduate levels. the jawaharlal nehru technological university, kakinada, previously established as vizagapatnam college of engineering on military land offers engineering courses and has a business school, and rangaraya medical college is a reputed medical college in the state. ministry of commerce has inaugurated the prestigious indian institute of foreign trade in the city making it only their 3rd campus in the country after delhi & kolkata.
p r college is another old college and shri peddada rama swamy worked as a principal for some time. personalities like devulapalli krishna sastri, p v narasimha rao, ushasri were students at that time. pr high school & christian missionary school in jagannadhapuram are the oldest institutions in the town.
andhra university postgraduate centre, established in 1977, is another college in kakinada. the university is located on a 50.93-acre (20.61 ha) campus in thimmapuram, six kilometers from the kakinada town railway station.
there are a total of 65 government schools with 11,240 students studying in them.
andhra polytechnic was established in 1946 by the british india government on the land donated by msn charities jagannaickpur. msn charities also running so many educational institutions including vedic school since the british era and a degree college.
national institute of technology, andhra pradesh, tadepalligudem is 80 km from kakinada city.
