kakinada
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
the city has various modes of transport in terms of road, rail and sea. previously private city buses and rickshaws used to dominate the roads but after massive amount of urbanisation the primary mode of intra-city public transport is auto rickshaws and there are about 7,000 of them being operated in the city limits with an additional of 3,000 from the surrounding settlements. non-transport vehicles cover, motorcycles, bicycles. for cyclists and motorists, there are planned cycling paths, bicycle sharing stations, and bike hiring outlets.
roadways[edit]
kakinada is connected by road to the rest of the state and other cities of india by means of national highways. national highway 216 which stretches from kathipudi to ongole passes through kakinada. the bypass road is under construction which reduces the traffic in the city it is a well planned city with grid type road network. the city has a total road length of 719.21 km.state highway 42 connects kakinada with other cities. adb road and canal road connects kakinada with rajamahendravaram. government is going to construct a new national highway to tuni along coast under sagaramala scheme.
railways[edit]
kakinada town jn. railway station main entrance
kakinada town and kakinada port are the two railway stations serving the rail needs of the city. kakinada town is classified as an a–category station in vijayawada railway division. it is recognised as one of the adarsh stations of the division in south coast railway zone.
samalkot junction located on chennai – howrah main line is also the main junction serving kakinada.
kakinada-kotipalli railway line reinstalled to link konaseema with mainland. kakinada-pithapuram railway line is still in progress. three main trains run from kakinada namely, gowthami express to hyderabad, circar express to chennai and seshadri express to bangalore, kakinada to hyderabad ac cocanada express, kakinada to bhavnagar express, kakinada to ltt, kakinada to shirdi express, kakinada to vijayawada passenger, kakinada to vishakapatnam passenger, kakinada to tirupathi passenger, kakinada to kotipalli bus train.
scr operates its carriage and wagon depot which is one of the medium sized depots in vijayawada division. it's the second station after vijayawada junction railway station to have intermediate overhauling ioh shed for all types of coaches.
waterways[edit]
far view of kakinada port from beach
kakinada port is located on the shore of bay of bengal. it is one of the intermediate ports in the state. the national waterway 4 connects kakinada with puducherry and was declared in 2008 as national waterway by the inland waterways authority of india for cargo transport and tourism.
airways[edit]
the nearest airport is rajahmundry airport which is 55 km from the city. reliance industries ltd (ril) operates an aerodrome at gadimoga in the city. cocanada was a stop by francesco de pinedo of the regia aeronautica and his mechanic, ernesto campanelli, during pinedo's 1925 rome- australia-tokyo-rome flight.
