kanpur
Government and politics[edit]
government and politics[edit]
officials   divisional commissioner  raj shekhar    district magistrate   neha sharma    additional director general, kanpur zone  avanish chandra   inspector general, kanpur range  alok singh   dig/senior superintendent of police  sonia singh   vice chairman, kanpur development authority  kinjal singh   mayor  pramila pandey   municipal commissioner  avinash singh   district judge  shashi kant shukla   chief metropolitan magistrate  shabistan aquil
administration[edit]
general administration[edit]
kanpur division which consists of seven districts, and is headed by the divisional commissioner of kanpur, who is an indian administrative service (ias) officer of high seniority, the commissioner is the head of local government institutions (including municipal corporations) in the division, is in charge of infrastructure development in his division, and is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the division. the district magistrate of kanpur reports to the divisional commissioner. the current commissioner is dr. raj shekhar.
kanpur district administration is headed by the district magistrate of kanpur, who is an ias officer. the dm is in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government and oversees the elections held in the city. the dm is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the city. the dm is assisted by a chief development officer; four additional district magistrates for finance/revenue, city, land acquisition, and civil supply; one city magistrat; and seven additional city magistrates. the district has three tehsils viz. sadar, bilhaur and ghatampur, each headed by a sub-divisional magistrate. the current dm is mr. vishak g
civic administration[edit]

main articles: kanpur development authority and kanpur municipal corporation
kanpur municipal corporation hq
kanpur municipality was established on 22 november 1861, and was upgraded to a municipal corporation in 1959. the local government of kanpur is governed under the municipal act for the state, uttar pradesh municipal corporation act, 1959.
the area under the municipal limits of kanpur city, or kanpur municipal corporation, is spread over an area of 260 square km. it oversees civic activities in the city. the head of the corporation is the mayor, but the executive and administration of the corporation are the responsibility of the municipal commissioner, who is an uttar pradesh government-appointed provincial civil service officer of high seniority. the executive wing is headed by municipal commissioner, avinash singh and has the following departments: revenue, city cleansing, engineering, marg prakash, health, accounts, personnel/hrd, swasthya vibhag, education, mukya nagar lekha vibhag, pariyojna, udyan vibhag, chikitsa vibhag, encroachment & cattle catching department. there is also an executive committee present in the city.
the development of infrastructure in the city is overseen by kanpur development authority (kda), which comes under the housing department of uttar pradesh government. the divisional commissioner of kanpur acts as the ex-officio chairman of kda, whereas a vice chairperson, a government-appointed ias officer, looks after the daily matters of the authority. the current vice-chairman of kanpur development authority is k. vijayendra pandian.
the municipality receives revenue from general tax, advertisement tax, income from municipal properties, grants from state government etc.
law and order[edit]
the kanpur district court is headed by the district judge of kanpur, who is assisted by numerous additional district judges, civil judges (senior division) and additional civil judges. kanpur is a notified metropolitan area by up government under code of criminal procedure, 1973, and therefore has a chief metropolitan magistrate, who is assisted by several metropolitan magistrates. the 2017 district judge was shashi kant shukla, and the chief metropolitan magistrate was shabistan aquil.
police administration[edit]

main article: kanpur police
kanpur district comes under the kanpur police zone and kanpur police range, kanpur zone is headed by an additional director general-ranked indian police service (ips) officer, and the kanpur range is headed inspector general-ranked ips officer. the current adg, kanpur zone is avanish chandra, and ig, kanpur range is alok singh.
the district police is headed by a deputy inspector general/senior superintendent of police (dig/ssp), who is an ips officer, and is assisted by seven superintendents of police or additional superintendents of police for east, west, south, rural area, crime, traffic and modern control, who are either ips officers or provincial police service (pps) officers. each of the several police circles is headed by a circle officer (co) in the rank of deputy superintendent of police. the current dig/ssp is sonia singh.
politics[edit]
local politics[edit]
the city is divided into 6 zones and 110 wards with a ward population range of 19,000 to 26,000 and 110 corporators directly elected from each ward. as mandated by the 74th constitutional amendment, there were 11 ward committees in kanpur municipal corporation in 1991. local elections were last held in 2017, when the mayor, pramila pandey from the bjp, was elected. the previous mayor had been captain (retired) jagatvir singh drona. as of 2006, kanpur municipal council has an elected mayor-in-council system.
state politics[edit]
kanpur nagar district encompasses one lok sabha constituency and ten uttar pradesh vidhan sabha constituencies. the city of kanpur has one representative member of parliament in lok sabha for kanpur, satyadev pachauri.
civic utilities[edit]
the first development plan of the city was created by the kanpur development board in 1943. this was followed by the masterplan being designed by the town and country planning department from 1962 to 1991, which was adopted after the establishment of the kanpur development authority in 1974. the most recent masterplan is the draft master plan of 2021 .
electricity is supplied to the city by kanpur electricity supply company (kesco), which is under the uttar pradesh power corporation ltd (uppcl). fire services are under the state, uttar pradesh fire service.
water supply, sewerage is done by the jal kal vibhag of kmc. infrastructure development and maintenance is done by the state's body, up jal nigam. the piped water supply of kanpur city was started in 1892. after construction of ganga barrage on the river, a permanent and reliable source for the water supply got available to provide 1600 mld raw water. the city also receives water from the catchment areas of rivers ganga and pandu. however, while the total water supply requirement is 600 mld only 385 mld of potable water is being supplied. the city loses water due to leaky pipes and contamination of natural water sources. there is a severe water crisis in kanpur.
in 2015, ganga pollution control unit in kanpur got about rs 200 crores to make 4 stps functional. the city then reported having 3 stps for domestic waste. in 2017, there was only one sewage treatment plant for waste from tanneries, biggest source of industrial pollution to the ganga, was to be replaced by a newer one costing 400 cr as the old one could only treat 9 mld at the most. 823.1 mld of untreated sewage and 212.42 mld of industrial effluent flow into the river. in 2019, another stp costing worth rs 816.25 was to be set up. as of 2020, while the government has stopped pollution from kanpur's biggest drain, sishamau, of kanpur's 48 drains, eight still have no devices to stop effluents.
solid waste management is handled by the kmc. as of 2015, kanpur generates 1,500 tonnes of solid wastes from domestic and industrial sources, 64,000 tonnes of hazardous waste annually which includes metals and waste generated by tanneries, dye industries and chemical industries; while coal ash produced in kanpur amounts to 71,000 tonnes per annum.

