kanpur
Education and research[edit]
education and research[edit]

see also: list of educational institutions in kanpur
higher education[edit]
faculty building, iit kanpur
aerial view of chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university
prestigious public engineering institution indian institute of technology kanpur is located in kanpur city. it was one of the first indian institutes of technology established in 1959, created with the assistance of a consortium of nine us research universities as part of the kanpur indo-american programme (kiap).
other educational institutions in the city include three state universities. chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university is one of the largest universities in northern india catering to urban and rural students offering professional and academic courses in the disciplines of arts, science, commerce, law, engineering, biotechnology, computer applications, management and medicine.
chandra shekhar azad university of agriculture and technology is an agricultural university named after the indian revolutionary chandrashekhar azad which caters to the needs of the farming community of 29 districts of uttar pradesh.
harcourt butler technical university (hbti) offers bachelors, masters, and doctoral programs in engineering, as well as masters programs in business administration, and computer applications. dr.ambedkar institute of technology for handicapped, an institution to provide technical education to specially-abled students inaugurated by former prime minister atal bihari vajpayee in 1997, is also situated in kanpur.
there is also private universities in the city like: rama university part of the rama group. there are several good private technical and management institutions in the city.
medical education[edit]
ganesh shankar vidyarthi memorial medical college (gsvm medical college) is a state-run medical college in kanpur, uttar pradesh. it was founded in 1956 and named after ganesh shankar vidyarthi, a freedom fighter and journalist from kanpur. lala lajpat rai hospital, which is also known as hallet hospital, is associated with gsvm, kanpur.

