kanpur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
kanpur central railway station
airways
ganesh shankar vidyarthi airport has scheduled commercial flights to new delhi, mumbai, kolkata, bangalore, hyderabad, chennai and other cities of india. the nearest international airport is the chaudhary charan singh international airport in lucknow, which is around 77.1 km from kanpur, uttar pradesh.
railways
kanpur central is a major railhead and is among the busiest railway stations in the country. rail routes connect it to all major cities in the state and the country. it is an a-1 category railway station coming under the prayagraj railway division of north central railway zone of indian railways. around 300 trains pass through the station daily. other major railway stations serving the city include kanpur anwarganj, govindpuri, panki, kalyanpur, rawatpur, chandari, kanpur bridge and chakeri.
roadways
the city has had chronic problems with maintaining local roads. there are several important national highways that pass through kanpur.
nh no  route  total length   nh 19  delhi » mathura » agra » kanpur » allahabad » varanasi » mohania » aurangabad » barhi » palsit » asansol » kolkata  1435   nh 27  porbandar » udaipur » kota » shivpuri » jhansi » kanpur » lucknow  » darbhanga » alipurduar » guwahati » silchar  3507   nh 34  gangotri dham » rishikesh » haridwar » bijnore » ghaziabad » aligarh » kannauj » kanpur » hamirpur » mahoba » chhatarpur » jabalpur » lakhnadon  1426   nh(proposed)  kanpur » raebareli » sultanpur » shahganj » azamgarh » gaura barhaj » siwan » muzaffarpur  581
the upsrtc inter state bus station (isbt) of kanpur officially named as the "shaheed major salman khan bus station". it is locally known as the "jhakarkati bus station". it provides buses to important cities of india. other upsrtc controlled important bus stations are chunniganj bus stand for farrukhabad, bareilly and uttranchal routes, naubasta bus stand for hamirpur route, fazalganj is another hub for private carriers.
ring road

main article: outer ring road, kanpur
in 2011 it was reported by the indian express that "the national highways authority of india (nhai) is all set to develop a four-lane outer ring road along the periphery of kanpur with an aim to prevent traffic congestion in the industrial city caused by long-distance heavy vehicles. the new road, which will help the heavy vehicles to bypass the city, will be developed on built, operate and transfer (bot) basis under the phase-vii of national highways development programme (nhdp)"
kanpur metro
kanpur metro is a rail based mass transit system in the city of kanpur, india which shall further be extendable to kanpur metropolitan area. it consists of two lines- orange line and blue line. the priority corridor of the orange line, which connects iit kanpur to motijheel was inaugurated by the prime minister of india, narendra modi on 28 december 2021.
