kapurthala
Sultanpur Lodhi Places[edit]
sultanpur lodhi places[edit]
gurudwara ber sahib[edit]
the gurdwara ber sahib is situated at sultanpur lodhi, which is one of the four sub-divisions (tehsil) of kapurthala. this historic site is of great importance to sikhism as it is said to be the very place where the first guru of sikhs, guru nanak, spent 14 years (14 years 9 months 13 days) of his life . the place derives its name from a ber tree (zizyphus jujuba) said to be planted by guru nanak himself and under which he first uttered the mool mantra or the "sacred word or revelation" of sikhism.
the gurdwara bebe nanaki ji[edit]
the gurdwara bebe nanaki ji is situated in the sultanpur lodhi city of kapurthala distt. the gurdwara bebe nanaki ji comprises a central hall, with the guru granth sahib seated in a white marble palaki at the far end. the guru granth sahib is also seated in a small side room symbolizing bebe nanaki’s own lodging. over the sanctum, above the hall roof, is a square domed room with arched copings. bulbous domes adorn the corners of the hall roof.
gurudwara shri guru ka baag[edit]
gurudwara shri guru ka baag is situated in the sultanpur lodhi city in kapurthala distt. guru nanak spent 14 years in sultanpur lodhi as a young man working for nawab daulat khan lodhi. this was the house of guru nanak where his two sons baba sri chand and baba lakhmi chand were born. guru nanak tested his two sons, but neither proved worthy of being his successor. baba lakhmi chand was too involved in worldly affairs while baba sri chand chose the path of renunciation and became an aesthetic. guru sahib used to have langar prepared by bibi nanaki ji. well (khooh) is also located here, from which water was used for langar preparation.
gurudwara sri sant ghat sahib[edit]
gurudwara sri sant ghat sahib is situated in the sultanpur lodhi town of kapurthala district. it is situated on the bank of bein river. from ber sahib, satguru nanak dev ji dived into bein and disappeared. the big reason for this place to be named sant ghaat is that maharaaj guru nanak dev ji meditated here to the akaal purakh and went from here to serve the world.
