kapurthala
Monuments and buildings[edit]
monuments and buildings[edit]
sainik school, kapurthala
the city of kapurthala has several buildings and places of interest linked to its local history such as the sainik school (formerly jagatjit palace), shalimar bagh (gardens), district courts buildings, moorish mosque, panch mandir ("five temples"), clock tower, state gurudwara, kanjli wetlands, 15,000-capacity field hockey venue guru nanak stadium, jagjit club, and the njsa government college. the city also have first climatic change theater of country.
sainik school (jagatjit palace)[edit]
jagatjit palace, kapurthala
the sainik school, formerly known as jagatjit palace, is housed in what was formerly the palace of the erstwhile maharajah of kapurthala state, maharajah jagatjit singh. the palace building's architecture is based on the palace of versailles and fontainebleau and is spread over a total area of 200 acres (0.81 km). it was designed by a french architect m. marcel and built by a local builder allah ditta. it was built in renaissance style with the sunken park in the front (known as baija). its durbar hall (diwan-e-khas) is one of the finest in india, and the plaster of paris figures and painted ceilings represent the finest features of french and italian art and architecture. the construction of this palace was commenced in 1900 and completed in 1908 in time for the new wife of the maharajah anita delgado.
darbar hall (diwan -e-aam) old courts[edit]
the stately durbar hall stands proudly at the heart of the city of kapurthala, punjab. it was, at one time the court of maharaja jagatjit singh, its creator. maharaja's annual birthday celebrations and other state rituals and ceremonies were also held here. the highest court of appeal after maharaja's court was chief justice court, the last chief justice of kapurthala state was his lordship   hon’ble justice pandit dwarka dass randev from 1938 till 1947, he was son of dewan lala shiv narayan randev (collector and chief secretary ) of maharaja jagatjit singh of kapurthala and nephew of chief judge of kapurthala hon’ble justice lala bhagat ram randev from 1901 to 1913 . this complex after independence 1947 to 2016, was the district courts complex which houses the court of the district and the sessions judge as well as the offices of the deputy commissioner. the durbar hall was completed in 1889. its architecture represents indo-saracenic style. there is a beautiful upper deck gallery running on both sides. it unfolds stylized domes and canopies, and superb lattice work executed in stone. facing the massive wooden door of the main entrance is a splendid bronze equestrian statue of raja randhir singh.
elysee palace[edit]
the elysee palace was commissioned by kanwar bikrama singh and completed in 1862. this building has now been converted into mgn school of kapurthala.
moorish mosque[edit]
moorish mosque of kapurthala
an example of the secular history of kapurthala is the moorish mosque, a replica of the grand mosque of marrakesh, morocco, was built by a french architect, monsieur m manteaux. its construction was commissioned by the last ruler of kapurthala, maharajah jagatjit singh and took 13 years to complete between 1917 and 1930. it was then consecrated in the presence of the late nawab of bhawalpur. the mosque's inner dome contains decorations by the artists of the mayo school of art, lahore. the mosque is a national monument under the archaeological survey of india. it was one of the monumental creations in the state during the premiership of late diwan sir abdul hamid kt., cie, obe. it was his keen interest with maharaja's blessings that the mosque was completed. its wooden model lay at the entrance of the lahore museum.
jagatjit club[edit]
jagatjit club facade
jagatjit club is an elegant building situated in the heart of the city based on the greek roman style of architecture. its design loosely resembles the parthenon on the acropolis of athens and features the coat of arms of the erstwhile ruling family of kapurthala with their royal motto "pro rege et patria" (for king and country) on its pediment. the building has been used for a variety of purposes since it was constructed, it was used as a church in the early nineteenth century, as a cinema hall in the 1940s and now houses a local club which includes a well built badminton court, a card room and a dining hall.
gol kothi[edit]
gol kothi’ which stands opposite to the official residence of  senior superintendent of police (ssp) has a rich history. it was built by famous companion of maharaja ranjit singh and ruler of kapurthala state  raja fateh singh ahluwalia saheb of kapurthala in the year 1833 and was once the residence of dewan(chief minister)  of kapurthala erstwhile princely state.later, the last maharaja of kapurthala maharaja sir jagatjit singh saheb bahadur ahluwalia spent his formative years in the building in the 1880s.
shalimar gardens[edit]
shalimar gardens  are situated in roughly the centre of the city and provide an escape from the hustle-bustle of the city. the shahi samadhs (the royal cenotaphs) in the shalimar gardens emphasize the traditions of its ruling dynasty. marble obelisks inside the red sandstone chambers, are memorials to the former rulers and their families. nearby, a grand structure built in 1880 and built on a marble plinth, houses the samadhs of maharajas kharak singh, jagatjit singh and paramjit singh.
panch mandir (five temples)[edit]
panch mandir of kapurthala is a place of reverence for all faiths. the temple complex is home to five small temples. built during the reign of sardar fateh singh, an extraordinary feature of this temple is that from the entry door, one can view all the five idols and pay obeisance to all. there is a temple mandir shivala dewan banna mal gautam in nawanshahr which is replica  of panch mandir kapurthala. dewan banna mal gautam was chief minister of kapurthala state and manager of his highness maharaja sir randhir singh bahadur of kapurthala's estates in oudh.
the state gurdwara[edit]
the large and imposing red sandstone building (now painted white) of the state gurudwara was consecrated in 1915 under the charge of revail singh. built in the indo-saracenic style, it has vast expanses of marble haloed by the feet of the hundreds of devotees. it is situated in the center of the city on the sultanpur road. recently, it is being renovated. there is a big park behind the gurudwara building.
brahmkund mandir[edit]
mukhi shiv ling brahmkund temple is the jathere of gautam brahmin( shori gotra)  family of dewan banna mal gautam (misr). dewan banna mal was born in nawanshahr in gautam brahmin ( shori gotra) family, banna mal was son of vaid jhanda mal, this temple was built by dewan banna mal's sons dewan acchru mal gautam revenue minister of kapurthala state and dewan sundri mal gautam. dewan banna mal was dewan of maharaja randhir singh bahadur of kapurthala and manager of kapurthala's estate in oudh. bana malwala village in mand area of kapurthala is after banna mal's name and dewan banna mal has also built mandir shivala dewan   banna mal in nawanshahr.
kanjli wetlands[edit]
kanjli wetlands, on the western bein rivulet at the outskirts of the city, has been included in under the ramsar convention. it is a common site for bird watching and boating. an enormous project is currently being undertaken here to develop it into a destination for bird watching replete with modern-day facilities. the kanjli wetlands have been in a state of neglect lately with little attention being given by the authorities to the condition of flora and fauna and its surrounding infrastructure.
