karur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
mill view of tnpl, karur
the city has about 19% of its total area under agricultural land use. the major crops are rice, cotton, sugar cane and oil seeds, while the major horticultural crops are coconut, banana, betel and mango. the town is the commercial centre for trading of agricultural commodities from the nearby towns and villages. karur, being the headquarters of the district, has registered growth in tertiary sectors, with a corresponding decrease in the primary sector. approximately 80 per cent of the workforce is employed in tertiary sector, 17 per cent in primary sector and 4% in secondary sector activities.
all major government and private banks have branches at karur. private banks karur vysya bank and lakshmi vilas bank have their headquarters in karur.
home textiles[edit]
karur is a major home textile centre and has five major product groups — bed linens, kitchen linens, toilet linens, table linens and wall hangings. the city generates around ₹10000 crores. more than 1.5 billion us$ in foreign exchange through direct and indirect exports. major importers are wallmart, sears in the us, ikea in sweden and other major retailers in the uk. allied industries like ginning and spinning mills, dyeing factories and weaving employ around 300,000 people in and around karur. hand-loom exports from karur began on a modest scale with just 15 exporters in 1975. karur is also home to an integrated textile park, ₹190 crore karur textile park limited (ktpl) a premier facility of its kind in the country for its technical and ancillary facilities.
bus body manufacturing[edit]
karur is a major hub for bus body [coach] building in south india, with a major market share of almost 70% of bus coaches being built here locally. the total business turnover from building bus coaches is estimated to be around ₹1000 crore per annum.
mosquito nets[edit]
about 60% of mosquito nets in india are manufactured in karur. about 2000 units are engaged in making high-density polyethylene (hdpe) mono filament yarn and associated products and employ about 50,000 people.
newsprint[edit]
tnpl promoted by the government of tamil nadu with loan assistance from the world bank, located near karur, is the largest producer of bagasse (sugarcane waste from sugar mills) based paper in the world and the second-largest paper producer in asia. the firm produces 230,000 tonnes of printing and writing paper and consumes 1 million tonnes of bagasse every year.
others[edit]
bharat petroleum corporation formed a joint venture with petronet cck and has installed a pipeline facility from cochin to karur for transporting petroleum products. the petroleum products received at the bpcl-karur terminal in athur is supplied to more than 20 districts of tamil nadu through tanker trucks. chettinad group has established a wet process cement plant at puliyur near karur with a capacity of 1.7 mtpa.
