karur
History[edit]
history[edit]

see also: history of karur
tamil brahmi inscription from pugalur, near karur
karur has been ruled at different times by the murkala cheras (before the sangam period) before the kodungalur cheras, later cholas, vijayanagar empire, madurai nayaks, mysore kingdom and the british.
karur is one of the oldest towns in tamil nadu and has played a very significant role in the history and culture of the tamils. the history dates back to the sangam period when it was a flourishing trade centre. karur was built on the banks of river amaravathi which was called aanporunai during the sangam days. according to hinduism, brahma began the work of creation here, which is referred to as the "place of the sacred cow.". karuvur, identified with karur, was also the capital of the ancient king musuguntha solan.
epigraphical, archaeological and literary evidence indicate that karur was the capital of early chera kings of sangam age. the names of early chera kings who ruled from karur have been found in the rock inscriptions in aaru nattar malai close to karur. the tamil epic silapathikaram mentions that the famous chera king senguttuvan ruled from karur. the archaeological excavations undertaken in karur resulted in the excavation of mat-designed pottery, bricks, mud-toys, roman coins, chera coins, pallava coins, roman amphorae, rasset coated ware and rare rings. karur might have been the center for old jewellery-making and gem setting (with the gold imported mainly from rome), as seen from various excavations. in 150 ce, greek scholar ptolemy mentioned "korevora" (karur) as a very famous inland trading center in south india. it was ruled by the cheras, western gangas, cholas, the vijayanagara nayaks, tipu sultan and the british successively.
karur municipality was constituted in 1874. it was upgraded to a i grade municipality on 24.10.69, upgraded to selection grade municipality on 24.05.1988, and upgraded to a special grade municipality on 07.04.1988. the town is very expanded now, with 48 wards, much like a city corporation.
