karur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road[edit]
the karur corporation maintains 59.02 km (36.67 mi) of roads. the city has 17.77 km (11.04 mi) concrete roads, 0.53 km (0.33 mi) wbm roads, 0.57 km (0.35 mi) gravel roads and 40.15 km (24.95 mi) bituminous road. a total of 9.51 km (5.91 mi) of state highways is maintained by the state highways department and 7 km (4.3 mi) of national highways by the national highways department.
there are 2 national highways namely the nh 44 (new numbering) national highway 7 (india)(old numbering) (varanasi - kanyakumari road (now called nsc north–south corridor road nh 44) and nh 67 nagapattinam - gudalur road that pass via karur. it connects the city with all other parts of the country.
karur bus stand is a b-grade bus stand located in the center of the town. the state express transport corporation operates long-distance buses connecting the city to important cities like chennai, bangalore, thiruvananthapuram, thirupathi, nagercoil, etc. apart from this, tamil nadu state transport corporation operates city and moffusil busses from karur to other parts of tamil nadu and neighbourhood states. karnataka state road transport corporation and kerala state road transport corporation also operates few busses to and from karur. karur is situated at the centre of tamil nadu so you can reach any part of tamil nadu within seven hours.
railway[edit]
entrance of railway station
karur junction railway station (station code - krr) is one of the railway junctions under the salem division of the indian railways network. it is one of the major railway station in southern railways and also an a grade junction in salem division. almost all trains to various part of the country halts here. it has 5 active platforms and 7 broad gauge electrified tracks, that forms the intersection between erode-tiruchirapalli, erode-madurai and salem-karur. section.
airport[edit]
the nearest local and international airport is the tiruchirapalli international airport, located 78 km, coimbatore international airport, located 121 km & salem airport, located 116 km away from the city.
