kochi
Education
education

see also: education in india, education in kerala, and educational institutions in ernakulam district

established in 1875, the maharaja's college is one of the oldest colleges in the statethe main building of model engineering college was inspired from india's first satellite, aryabhattathe cochin university of science and technology is one of the top educational institutions in the countryrajagiri college of social sciences at kalamassery
secondary education
the pattern of primary education is essentially the same all over the state. there are government owned schools and government aided schools, which are affiliated to the kerala state education board. a few privately owned schools are also affiliated to the system. most of the schools owned by private organisations or individuals are affiliated to the central board for secondary education (cbse). indian certificate of secondary education (icse) have some schools affiliated to them as well. the state education board offers both malayalam and english medium instruction, while the other boards offer english medium alone. there are a few schools that follow international curricula, such as ib and igcse.
there 34 government schools, 67 private aided schools and 31 unaided schools affiliated to the kerala state education board in the city and suburbs. there are 62 cbse schools, 2 igcse and 9 icse schools as well.
the notable schools in the government sector are sree rama varma high school, edappally high school, government school-kochi and govt girls higher secondary school, ernakulam. there are kendriya vidyalaya, chinmaya mission and bharatiya vidya bhavan run several quasi-private charter schools within the city limits, as well as in the suburbs. there are several private schools (both aided & unaided0 that are owned by secular and religious trusts which are of particular renown, such as:st. albert's hss, ernakulam, st. teresa's cghss, st. mary's cghss ernakulam, st. antony's cghss, model technical higher secondary school, kaloor the delta study, rajagiri public school, campion school, assisi vidyaniketan, cochin refineries school, gregorian public school, greets public school, toc-h public school, navy children school, global public school, choice school, vidyodaya school, mar thoma public school, nava nirman public school and st. pauls international school, kalamassery, the charter school kochi.
higher education
the cochin university of science and technology (cusat) is a major university named after the city. most of the colleges in kochi offering tertiary education are affiliated either with the mahatma gandhi university or with the cochin university. kochi has one of the campuses of the indian maritime university at willingdon island. sree sankaracharya university of sanskrit in kalady is a research-oriented university located at the outskirts. other national educational institutes include the central institute of fisheries nautical and engineering training, the national university of advanced legal studies, the national institute of oceanography and the central marine fisheries research institute.
kochi has some of the leading b-schools in the region. the indian institute of management kozhikode (iimk) has set up its first satellite campus at athulya building in infopark, kochi. cochin university's school of management studies (sms) is the first and oldest managerial education institution in south india. scms cochin is one of the emerging b-schools in the country. another major b-school xime is opening a new campus in kochi. other leading managerial institutions include rajagiri centre for business studies, kochi business school, amrita school of business, albertian institute of management and toc-h b school.
the city and outskirts are home to four medical schools—amrita institute of medical sciences and research centre at ponekkara, cochin medical college at kalamassery, sree narayana institute of medical sciences, and m.o.s.c. medical college, kolenchery. some of the prestigious general colleges are maharaja's college, st. albert's college, st. teresa's college, sacred hearts college, bharata matha college, aquina's college, de paul institute of science & technology (dist) and cochin college. the major engineering and technology colleges in the city are school of engineering cusat, scms school of engineering and technology at kalamassery, model engineering college, rajagiri school of engineering & technology and fisat (federal institute of science & technology).
being the seat of the high court of kerala, several top legal education institutes are here. the government law college-ernakulam is one of the oldest law schools in kerala. the school of legal studies (sls), cusat is one of the leading graduate, post-graduate, and research institutes in the country. the national university of advanced legal studies (nuals) is located in the city, which is a premier law university in india and the only law college listed in clat (common law admission test) in kerala.
