kochi
Media
media
akshara mandiram at marine drive
major malayalam newspapers published in kochi include malayala manorama, mathrubhumi, siraj daily, madhyamam, deshabhimani, deepika, kerala kaumudi, janmabhumi, etc. popular english newspapers include the hindu, the new indian express, the times of india, the pioneer and the deccan chronicle. a number of evening papers are also published from the city. newspapers in other regional languages like hindi, kannada, tamil and telugu are also available.
a number of financial publications are also published in the city. these include the economic times, business line, the business standard and the financial express. prominent magazines and religious publications like the sathyadeepam, the week and vanitha are also published from the city.
kochi houses several leading malayalam television channels like asianet plus, flowers, jeevan tv, mazhavil manorama, kairali we, manorama news and reporter tv as well as major news bureaus of asianet, kairali tv, amrita tv and doordarshan. prasar bharati maintains its earth station and broadcasting centre in kakkanad, kochi. satellite television services are available through dd direct+, dish tv, airtel digital tv, reliance dth, sun direct dth and tata sky. fm radio channels broadcast from kochi are rainbow fm (air) 101.9 mhz, air kochi 102.3 mhz, club fm 94.3 mhz, radio mango 91.9 mhz, red fm 93.5 mhz, radio mirchi 104.0 mhz.
kochi is considered to be the hub of the vibrant malayalam movie industry, especially contemporary malayalam movies. the rise of kochi to the centre stage of the entertainment industry occurred coinciding with the economic boom of the last couple of decades. many movies are shot in kochi every year. kochi also has a host of state-of-the-art production and post-production facilities. due to these reasons, major section of film personalities including of actors, technical experts and other related workers reside in kochi. there are over 50 cinema halls that screen movies in malayalam, tamil, english and hindi. the city hosts kerala's first cine multiplex, at the oberon mall with four screens. gold souk grande also has a cine multiplex operated by q cinemas with four screens. pvr with 9 screens is another national multiplex brand that has presence in kochi and is based out of lulu international shopping mall. cinepolis at centre square mall with 11 screens is the first international megaplex brand in the state. 16 more multiplex screens are expected in the city in the near future.
the district has the largest number of telephone connections in kerala. telephony services are provided by various private sector players like aircel, airtel, idea cellular, vodafone, reliance infocomm, tata docomo, jio, tata indicom and the state owned bsnl. all the private sector telecom companies have their headquarters for kerala circle located in kochi.
