kochi
Demographics
demographics
religions in kochi city (2011)  religion  percentage   hinduism   43.78%   christianity   38.12%   islam   17.56%   others   0.54%

see also: hinduism in kerala, cochin jews, saint thomas christians, islam in kerala, and latin church
kochi has the highest population density in kerala with 7139 people per km.
the santa cruz basilica at fort kochi is one of the eight basilicas in india
as of 2011, kochi had a metropolitan area population of 2,117,990. the female-to-male ratio is 1,028:1,000, significantly higher than the all-india average of 933:1,000. kochi's literacy rate is 97.5%. the female literacy rate lags that of males by 1.1%, amongst the lowest such gaps in india.
dharmanath jain temple at mattancherry
kochi's major religions are hinduism, christianity and islam. jainism, judaism, sikhism and buddhism, with smaller followings, are also practised in kochi. though 44% practice hinduism, christianity's large following (38%) makes kochi a city with one of the largest christian populations in india. the majority of the city's residents are malayalis. however, there are significant ethnic minority communities including tamils, gujaratis, jews, anglo-indians, sikhs and konkanis malayalam is the main language of communication and medium of instruction for primary education, although a number of schools do offer english medium education. the higher education is invariably in english medium, and it is the preferred language in business circles. tamil and hindi are widely understood—albeit rarely spoken.
like other fast-growing cities in the developing world, kochi suffers from major urbanisation problems. the city was ranked tenth among indian cities in terms of house-cost and availability, urban household crowding and household incomes.
the government has plans to make the city slum-free by 2016. according to the national crime records bureau, the city holds the fourth position in the number of recorded crimes in india. in 2009, the city recorded an average crime rate of 646.3 against the national average of 181.4. but kochi city police commissioner later clarified that this anomaly was due to higher reporting rates of minor crimes in kochi than in other indian cities. the state crime records bureau (scrb) report gives further credence to this as it finds that kochi has the fewest crime against women in the state of kerala. according to the 2011 cii/institute of competitiveness report on liveability, kochi stands first in the state, and sixth in the country. kochi is ranked seventh in the list of the top ten most affluent cities in india by 2009 study by nielsen company. kochi was ranked the fourth cleanest city in india in the swachch bharat rankings for cities. it was selected as one of the hundred indian cities to be developed as a smart city under prime minister narendra modi flagship smart cities mission.
