kochi
Transport
transport

main article: transport in kochi
a panoramic view of vyttila mobility hub
air
the air gateway to kochi is the cochin international airport (cial) located at nedumbassery, which is about 28 km (17 mi) north of kochi city, and handles both domestic and international flights. it is the first international airport in india to be built without central government funds and is the world's first fully solar energy powered airport.
the cochin airport provides direct connectivity to popular international destinations in the middle east, malaysia, thailand and singapore and to most major indian cities apart from tourist destinations like lakshadweep. kochi is also the headquarters of the air india express service. with a terminal area of 840,000 sq ft (78,000 m), and a passenger capacity of 2200 (international and domestic), it is the largest and busiest airport in the state. it is also the fourth busiest airport in india in terms of international passenger traffic, and seventh busiest overall.

the cochin international airport is one of the busiest airports in the country and the first fully solar powered airport in the worlda ksrtc double-decker bus on service in the citykochi metro is the fastest completed metro project in indiaernakulam boat jetty is one of the main boat jetties in the cityferry service boat at kochi backwaters
road
kochi is well connected to neighbouring cities and states via several highways. it is a node in the north-south corridor of the national highway system. the road infrastructure in kochi has not been able to meet the growing traffic demand and hence traffic congestion is a major problem in the city.
kochi is served by national highway 66, national highway 544, national highway 966a and national highway 966b.
several state highways also connect kochi with other parts of kerala. sh 15, ettumanoor-ernakulam road, connects the city to kottayam, pala, kumily, changanacherry, pathanamthitta etc. sh 41, palarivattom-thekkady road, provides a corridor to the eastern parts of the district. sh 63, vypeen pallipuram road and sh 66, alappuzha – thoppumpady road are coastal roads that serve the narrow sliver of land between the backwaters and the sea.
the main arterial roads of the city are the mahatma gandhi road and sahodaran ayyappan road in ernakulam, constructed in 1925 & 1962 respectively which runs parallel & perpendicular to the coast and having the proposed metro rail connectivity. the seaport-airport road is another major road and connects the cochin seaport to the cochin international airport. the infopark expressway in kakkanad is connected to the seaport-airport road and stretches all the way to infopark. other major roads include chittoor road, banerji road, shanmugham road, kochi bypass, kaloor-kadavanthra road, park avenue etc. a new ring road is proposed for kochi city by the state government for which a project study is being currently undertaken by natpac.
public transport
road
the primary form of public transport within the city is largely dependent on privately owned bus networks. the state-run also operates its services in the city through the thirukochi service. the major bus terminals in the city are ernakulam town, ernakulam jetty and the private bus terminal at kaloor. an integrated transit terminal namely the mobility hub at vytilla is under second phase of construction. the terminal acts as a hub for long-distance bus services away from the city centre, and also a converging point for different modes of public transport, namely bus, metro and ferry.
kochi is one of the few cities to be granted the new-generation air-conditioned low-floor and non-air-conditioned semi-low-floor buses under the jnnurm city transport development project. kurtc and private buses operate frequent schedules to neighbouring areas of nedumbassery, perumbavoor, aluva, muvattupuzha, kothamangalam, cherthala and poochakkal. taxis and auto rickshaws (called autos) are available for hire throughout the day.
development of road infrastructure not keeping pace with the increase in traffic is a major problem faced by kochi, like most other parts of kerala.
rail
the city has four major railway stations – ernakulam junction, ernakulam town (locally known as the south and north railway stations respectively), aluva, angamaly and tripunithura followed by smaller stations, edapally and kalamassery. there is also the cochin harbour terminus providing rail connectivity to the southern segment of the port of kochi. the terminus is currently under renovation for the suburban rail networks in the city. the main rail transport system in kochi is operated by the southern railway zone of indian railways, and comes under thiruvananthapuram railway division. the south station is one of the busiest railway stations in south india, with more than 128 scheduled train services daily. the north station situated on the northern side of the city, caters mostly to long-distance services that bypass the south station, and also is an additional halt station for many trains.
there is also a historic station named as ernakulam terminus(station code:erg) situated behind the high court. great personalities like mahatma gandhi and the british viceroy have visited cochin through this old railway station. ernakulam terminus was the first station to serve the city but had to be abandoned in the early 1960s. now this station operates as a goods depot of southern railway.
metro

main article: kochi metro
the kochi metro is a metro rapid transit system serving the city of kochi, intended to considerably ease traffic congestion in the city and its surrounding metropolitan area. it is being set up at an overall estimated cost of ₹5,146 crore (us$640 million). the phase-1 of the metro system will have 22 stations connecting the suburban towns of aluva and pettah while passing through downtown. the first half of the phase-1 of kochi metro was inaugurated on 17 june 2017 by indian prime minister narendra modi. currently kochi metro is operational from aluva till maharaja's college along the kalamassery - edappally - kaloor - mg road stretch, covering a total of 18.4 km with 16 operational metro stations.
water

see also: kochi water metro
kochi ranks among india's major seaports, partly due to being one of the safest harbours in the indian ocean. the port, administered by a statutory autonomous body known as the cochin port trust, offers facilities for bunkering, handling cargo and passenger ships and storage accommodation. the port is a complex of three islands, one of which is man-made.
it also operates passenger ships to colombo and lakshadweep. boat services are operated by kerala shipping and inland navigation corporation, the state water transport department and private firms from various boat jetties in the city. the junkar ferry for the transshipment of vehicles and passengers between the islands are operated between ernakulam and vypin, and between vypin and fort kochi. however, with the construction of the goshree bridges (which links kochi's islands), ferry transport has become less essential. the main boat jetties are ernakulam main boat jetty near park avenue, high court jetty in banerjee road, embarkation jetty in willingdon island and fort kochi jetty.
