kochi
Culture
culture

main article: culture of kochi

see also: cuisine of kerala and list of tourist attractions in kochi
marine drive, kochi
as a result of successive waves of migration over the course of several centuries, the population of the city is a mix of people from all parts of kerala and most of india. the pan-indian nature is highlighted by the substantial presence of various ethnic communities from different parts of the country.

pedestrians can stroll along the marine drive, a waterfront promenade of kochilulu mall is one of the largest shopping malls in indiathe kettuvallom bridge at marine drive
kochi has a diverse, multicultural, and secular community consisting of malayalis, konkanis, gujaratis, bengalis, marathis, punjabis, tamilians, kannadigas, biharias, anglo indians and a few families of jews among other denominations. the city once had a large jewish community, known as the malabar yehuden—and now increasingly as cochin jews—who figured prominently in kochi's business and economic strata and owned several synagogues across kochi and nearby areas such as chendamangalam, paravur or mala.
kochi was one among the seven diocese of syrian orthodox (jacobite syrian christian church) in kerala formed in 1876. the seat of the bishop is at st george cathedral, karingachira. also at mary's cathedral elamkulam, seat of bishop of simhasana churches of jacobites is in the city. the seat of roman catholic cathedral of kerala's first archdiocese archdiocese of verapoly and the first diocese diocese of cochin are located in the city. the syro-malabar church, one of the 22 sui iuris eastern catholic churches and a part of the saint thomas christian community, has its seat at ernakulam. prominent places of christian worship include the st. mary's syro-malabar catholic cathedral basilica, ernakulam, st. francis assisi roman catholic cathedral, ernakulam, basilica of our lady of ransom, vallarpadam-ernakulam, santa cruz basilica roman catholic cathedral, fort kochi, st. antony's shrine at kaloor, st. george forane church, edappally and . appropriate to its multi-ethnic composition, kochi celebrates traditional kerala festivals like onam and vishu along with north indian hindu festivals like holi with great fervour. christian and islamic festivals like christmas, easter, eid ul-fitr and milad-e-sherif are also celebrated. a merry making fest called the cochin carnival is celebrated at fort kochi during the last ten days of december.
the residents of kochi are known as kochiites; they are an important part of the south indian culture. however, the city's culture is rapidly evolving with kochiites generally becoming more cosmopolitan in their outlook. the people are also increasingly fashion-conscious, often deviating from the traditional kerala wear to western clothing.
kochiites generally partake of keralite cuisine, which is generally characterised by an abundance of coconut and spices. other south indian cuisines, as well as chinese and north indian cuisines are popular. fast food culture is also very prominent. being a tourist hotspot, fort kochi have a number of restaurants that offer international cuisine, like italian, french, mexican etc. being close to the ocean and the backwaters, kochi has an abundance of seafood, which reflects in the cuisine. cochin is also called the official food capital of kerala with largest number of restaurants and cafeterias in kerala that serves every kind of delicious cuisine. a service known as you buy, we cook is available at the waterfront of fort kochi, where the fresh seafood purchased from the nets is cooked as per the customers needs. arabian food joints that serve shawarma and roasted chicken are a new addition to the fast food scene in the city.
kochi also has a number of shopping malls including oberon mall, gold souk grande, bay pride mall, centre square mall, abad nucleus mall and lulu mall, which is one of the largest shopping malls in india in terms of total leasable area of 17 acres (7 ha). various shopping malls are expected to open in the city in the near future including forum thomsun mall.
kochi is the official food capital of kerala because of the highest number of restaurants and the varieties of foods available. kochi serves every type of food available in kerala. its very famous for varieties of non vegetarian food. kochi also has the most five star hotels in the state. these include international brands like crowne plaza, marriott international, grand hyatt, sheraton, le méridien, radisson blu, holiday inn, ramada, ibis, taj malabar, the gateway etc.
kochi was home to some of the most influential figures in malayalam literature, including changampuzha krishna pillai, kesari balakrishna pillai, g. sankara kurup, and vyloppilli sreedhara menon. prominent social reformers such as sahodaran ayyappan and pandit karuppan also are from kochi. the kochi international book festival is an annual event.
the maharajas of kochi (then cochin) were scholars who knew the epics and encouraged the arts. the paintings at the hill palace and the dutch palace are testimony to their love for arts.
kochiites are known for their enthusiasm in sports, especially football and cricket. the jawaharlal nehru international stadium in kochi is one of the largest stadiums in india with floodlights for cricket and football matches. the regional sports centre is an important centre of sporting activity in the city. kochi is reportedly the sixth best city in india according to the livability index of 2011.
