kochi
Sports
sports
like elsewhere in kerala, football is arguably the most passionate sport among the locals. in the indian super league, kerala blasters represents the city as well as the state of kerala. the blasters are one of the most widely supported clubs in the country as well as the fifth most followed football club from asia in the social media. kochi was also home to the now defunct football clubs fc kochin and chirag united kerala. fc kochin is considered as the first fully professional football club from india. kochi was one of the six cities to host the 2017 fifa u-17 world cup held in india.

the jawaharlal nehru stadium is one of the largest stadiums in indiathe regional sports centre at kadavanthra houses the mahesh bhupathi tennis academy
india's fourth largest stadium and third largest cricket stadium, the jawaharlal nehru international stadium located in kaloor, is a major facility for football and cricket.  kochi was home to the now defunct indian premier league cricket team, kochi tuskers which won franchise rights to play in the 2011 edition of ipl.
the maharaja's stadium located on mg road in the heart of the city, is the major athletic facility in the state with synthetic tracks and turf grass as per international standards. the ambedkar stadium, maintained by gcda, was developed exclusively for football with funds from government of kerala and fifa. spanish club real madrid has proposed to set up a football school in kochi.
the rajiv gandhi sports complex at kadavanthra is a major indoor stadium, mainly used for conducting badminton, tennis and basketball tournaments. the 25m x 10m swimming pool at the centre is one of the larger water sports facility in the state, where regular swimming competitions and coaching are conducted.
the fact grounds at udyogamandal, sacred heart's college grounds, hmt grounds at kalamassery and st. albert's college grounds are the other major training facilities for various games like volleyball, badminton, cricket etc.
kochi has two golf courses in the city, and one in the suburbs. the oldest golf club is located at bolgatty palace constructed in 1903, which is a nine-hole facility run by cochin golf club society. the cochin golf and country club located near to cochin airport, operated by cial, is kerala's first 18-hole golf course with a playing area of over 7,200 yards. the first phase of the all-weather golf course comprising nine holes was opened in may 2010 for members and public. the expansion to an 18-hole course is progressing, which is scheduled to be open in september 2012.
being surrounded by water bodies, the city is ideal for yachting. the kerala yachting association and the cochin yacht club are located in the city. both organisations conduct regular yachting tournaments. kochi was the only indian city chosen for stopover during the volvo ocean race 2008.
