kolhapur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
dyp city mall, kolhapur
reliance mega mall at kolhapur
manufacturing industry[edit]
kolhapur has a higher per capita domestic product than the state's average. it has auto-ancillary, foundry and casting industrial establishments which act as supporting units for industries in pune and bangalore.
the city is the home of kolhapuri chappal, a hand-crafted buffalo leather slipper that is locally tanned using vegetable dyes. kolhapuri slippers are sold on mahadwar road. other handicrafts include hand block printing of textiles, silver, bead and paste jewellery crafting, pottery, wood carving and lacquerware, brass sheet work and oxidised silver artwork, and lace and embroidery making.
kolhapur is also an industrial city with approximately 300 foundries generating exports with a value of 15 billion rupees per year. a manufacturing plant of kirloskar oil engines [koel] is set up in the midc at kagal near kolhapur, as is the raymond clothes plant. kolhapur has two more industrial areas, gokul-shirgaon midc and shiroli midc. shivaji udyamnagar is an industrial area in the city with a rich entrepreneurial tradition of more than 100 years and specializing in oil engines.
kolhapuri jewelry includes a type of necklace called kolhapuri saaj, patlya (two broad bangles), chinchpeti (choker), tanmani (short necklace), nath (nose ring), and bajuband (an amulet).
tourism[edit]
the bombay gazetteer recorded almost 250 temples in the region of which 6 - ambabai, temblai, vithoba, mahakali, phiranga and yallamma temples - are considered the most prominent. tourism is an important source of revenue with about three million annual visitors. kolhapur's attractions include:
mahalakshmi temple, kolhapur jyotiba temple panhala fort kaneri math new palace the world's first statue of babasaheb ambedkar at bindu chowk, inaugurated on 7 december 1950 temblai temple complex
bust of dr. babasaheb ambedkar at bindu chowk in kolhapur
rankala lake the tara rani equestrian statue an 85 feet (26 m) idol of the lord ganesh at the chinmaya mission (top-sambhapur).
the kolhapur maybach car of the chhatrapatis of kolhapur is displayed to the public during the annual dusshera procession.
film industry[edit]
a memorial to baburao painter in kolhapur
on 1 december 1917, the maharashtra film company was established in kolhapur by baburao painter. the city has become the primary centre for the marathi film industry. kolhapur plays host to many film festivals, including the kolhapur international film festival. the kolhapur film city was renovated in 2017.
