kolhapur
Notable people[edit]
notable people[edit]
shahu of kolhapur - maharaja and a social reformer. tarabai - maratha queen and warrior. ramchandra pant amatya - one of the ashta pradhans of shivaji. santaji ghorpade - maratha warrior and sarsenapati. bhalji pendharkar - award winning director. nanda - film actress. sudhir phadke - singer and composer. suresh wadkar - playback singer. jayant narlikar - indian astrophysicist. v. shantaram - indian filmmaker, film producer and actor. shivaji sawant - indian novelist. ranjit desai - popular marathi writer. master vinayak - indian actor and film director. suniti ashok deshpande - indian educator, writer, translator and interpreter. leena nair - ceo of chanel. d. y. patil - indian politician and educator. arun sarnaik - actor and singer. dhondutai kulkarni - indian classical singer from the jaipur-atrauli gharana. govindrao tembe - music composer. b. b. nimbalkar - indian cricketer, best known for his score of 443 not out during the 1948–49 ranji trophy. dhananjay mahadik - indian politician and former member of parliament. chandrakant patil - indian politician and maharashtra bjp president. ramesh deo - indian film and television actor. vasantrao ghatge - indian entrepreneur, business magnate, industrialist and a professor. jagdish khebudkar - marathi littérateur and lyricist of marathi cinema. ashutosh gowariker - indian film director, actor, screenwriter and producer. madhavrao bagal - writer, artist, journalist, social reformer, political activist, orator and a freedom fighter. anant mane - film director. satej patil - politician and minister of state for home in the maharashtra government. padmini kolhapure - film actress. shruti sadolikar - indian classical singer of the khyal style in the jaipur-atrauli gharana. sadashivrao dadoba mandlik - former member of parliament and ncp leader. sanjay mandlik - member of parliament and shiv sena leader. bhanu athaiya - indian costume designer and painter. sangram chougule - body builder, mr universe winner (2012), mr india (6-time winner), mr maharashtra (5-time winner). suhas khamkar - body builder.
