kolkata
Education
education

main article: education in kolkata
indian institute of management calcutta
kolkata's schools are run by the state government or private organisations, many of which are religious. bengali and english are the primary languages of instruction; urdu and hindi are also used, particularly in central kolkata. schools in kolkata follow the "10+2+3" plan. after completing their secondary education, students typically enroll in schools that have a higher secondary facility and are affiliated with the west bengal council of higher secondary education, the icse, or the cbse. they usually choose a focus on liberal arts, business, or science. vocational programs are also available. some kolkata schools, for example south point school, la martiniere calcutta, calcutta boys' school, st. james' school (kolkata), st. xavier's collegiate school and loreto house, have been ranked amongst the best schools in the country.
indian institute of foreign trade
as of 2010, the kolkata urban agglomeration is home to 14 universities run by the state government. the colleges are each affiliated with a university or institution based either in kolkata or elsewhere in india. aliah university which was founded in 1780 as mohammedan college of calcutta is the oldest post-secondary educational institution of the city. the university of calcutta, founded in 1857, is the first modern university in south asia. presidency college, kolkata (formerly hindu college between 1817 and 1855), founded in 1855, was one of the oldest colleges in india. it was affiliated with the university of calcutta until 2010 when it was converted to presidency university, kolkata in 2010. bengal engineering and science university (besu) is the second oldest engineering institution of the country located in howrah. an institute of national importance, besu was converted to india's first iiest. jadavpur university is known for its arts, science, and engineering faculties. the indian institute of management calcutta, which was the first of the indian institutes of management, was established in 1961 at joka, a locality in the south-western suburbs. kolkata also houses the indian institute of foreign trade, which was started here in the year 2006.
west bengal national university of juridical sciences
the west bengal national university of juridical sciences is one of india's autonomous law schools, and the indian statistical institute is a public research institute and university. state owned maulana abul kalam azad university of technology, west bengal (makaut, wb), formerly west bengal university of technology (wbut) is the largest technological university in terms of student enrollment and number of institutions affiliated by it. private institutions include the ramakrishna mission vivekananda educational and research institute and university of engineering & management (uem).
presidency university, kolkata
notable scholars who were born, worked or studied in kolkata include physicists satyendra nath bose, meghnad saha, and jagadish chandra bose; chemist prafulla chandra roy; statisticians prasanta chandra mahalanobis and anil kumar gain; physician upendranath brahmachari; educator ashutosh mukherjee; and nobel laureates rabindranath tagore, c. v. raman, and amartya sen.
aerial view of the amity university, kolkata
kolkata houses many research institutes like indian association for the cultivation of science (iacs), indian institute of chemical biology (iicb), indian institute of science education and research (iiser), bose institute, saha institute of nuclear physics (sinp), centre for studies in social sciences, calcutta, all india institute of hygiene and public health, central glass and ceramic research institute (cgcri), s.n. bose national centre for basic sciences (snbncbs), indian institute of social welfare and business management (iiswbm), national institute of pharmaceutical education and research, kolkata, variable energy cyclotron centre (vecc) and indian centre for space physics. nobel laureate sir c. v. raman did his groundbreaking work in raman effect in iacs.
