kolkata
Healthcare
healthcare

see also: healthcare in kolkata
calcutta medical college, the second institution in asia to teach modern medicine (after 'ecole de médicine de pondichéry')
as of 2011, the healthcare system in kolkata consists of 48 government hospitals, mostly under the department of health & family welfare, government of west bengal, and 366 private medical establishments; these establishments provide the city with 27,687 hospital beds. for every 10,000 people in the city, there are 61.7 hospital beds, which is higher than the national average of 9 hospital beds per 10,000. ten medical and dental colleges are located in the kolkata metropolitan area which act as tertiary referral hospitals in the state. the calcutta medical college, founded in 1835, was the first institution in asia to teach modern medicine. however, these facilities are inadequate to meet the healthcare needs of the city. more than 78% in kolkata prefer the private medical sector over the public medical sector, due to the overburdening of the public health sector, the lack of a nearby facility, and excessive waiting times at government facilities.
according to the indian 2005 national family health survey, only a small proportion of kolkata households were covered under any health scheme or health insurance. the total fertility rate in kolkata was 1.4, the lowest among the eight cities surveyed. in kolkata, 77% of the married women used contraceptives, which was the highest among the cities surveyed, but use of modern contraceptive methods was the lowest (46%). the infant mortality rate in kolkata was 41 per 1,000 live births, and the mortality rate for children under five was 49 per 1,000 live births.
ipgmer and sskm hospital, largest hospital in west bengal and one of the oldest in kolkata
among the surveyed cities, kolkata stood second (5%) for children who had not had any vaccinations under the universal immunization programme as of 2005. kolkata ranked second with access to an anganwadi centre under the integrated child development services (icds) programme for 57% of the children between 0 and 71 months. the proportion of malnourished, anaemic and underweight children in kolkata was less in comparison to other surveyed cities.
about 18% of the men and 30% of the women in kolkata are obese—the majority of them belonging to the non-poor strata of society. in 2005, kolkata had the highest percentage (55%) among the surveyed cities of anaemic women, while 20% of the men in kolkata were anaemic. diseases like diabetes, asthma, goitre and other thyroid disorders were found in large numbers of people. tropical diseases like malaria, dengue and chikungunya are prevalent in kolkata, though their incidence is decreasing. kolkata is one of the districts in india with a high number of people with aids; it has been designated a district prone to high risk. as of 2014, because of higher air pollution, the life expectancy of a person born in the city is four years fewer than in the suburbs.
