kolkata
Transport
transport

main article: transport in kolkata
the kolkata tram is the oldest operating electric tram system in asia.
public transport is provided by the kolkata suburban railway, the kolkata metro, trams, rickshaws, taxis and buses. the suburban rail network connects the city's distant suburbs.
the kolkata metro is the oldest rapid transit system in india.
according to a 2013 survey conducted by the international association of public transport, in terms of a public transport system, kolkata ranks among the top of the six indian cities surveyed. the kolkata metro, in operation since 1984, is the oldest underground mass transit system in india. it spans the north–south length of the city. in 2020, part of the second line was inaugurated to cover part of salt lake. this east–west line will connect salt lake with howrah. the two lines cover a distance of 33.02 km (21 mi). as of 2020, four metro rail lines were under construction.
the kolkata suburban railway is the busiest commuter rail system in india.
kolkata has five long-distance railway stations, located at howrah (the largest railway complex in india), sealdah, kolkata, shalimar and santragachi, which connect kolkata by rail to most cities in west bengal and to other major cities in india. the city serves as the headquarters of three railway zones out of eighteen of the indian railways regional divisions—the kolkata metro railways, eastern railway and the south-eastern railway. kolkata has rail and road connectivity with dhaka, the capital of bangladesh.
the yellow taxi remains a favourite despite the foray of rideshare companies in the transport market.
buses, which are the most commonly used mode of transport, are run by government agencies and private operators. kolkata is the only indian city with a tram network, which was operated by the calcutta tramways company. it has now renamed to west bengal transport corporation. the slow-moving tram services are restricted to certain areas of the city. water-logging, caused by heavy rains during the summer monsoon, sometimes interrupt transportation networks. hired public conveyances include auto rickshaws, which often ply specific routes, and yellow metered taxis. almost all of kolkata's taxis are antiquated hindustan ambassadors by make; newer air-conditioned radio taxis are in service as well. in parts of the city, cycle rickshaws and hand-pulled rickshaws are patronised by the public for short trips.
a road in kolkata showing bus, and cars. there are other modes of transport available such as taxi or cab, tram, metro, auto rikshaw, rikshaw and ferry or water taxi.
due to its diverse and abundant public transportation, privately owned vehicles are not as common in kolkata as in other major indian cities. the city has witnessed a steady increase in the number of registered vehicles; 2002 data showed an increase of 44% over a period of seven years. as of 2004, after adjusting for population density, the city's "road space" was only 6% compared to 23% in delhi and 17% in mumbai. the kolkata metro has somewhat eased traffic congestion, as has the addition of new roads and flyovers. agencies operating long-distance bus services include the west bengal transport corporation and various private operators. the city's main bus terminals are located at esplanade and babughat. the kolkata–delhi and kolkata–chennai prongs of the golden quadrilateral, and national highway 12 start from the city.
the terminal of the netaji subhash chandra bose international airport
netaji subhas chandra bose international airport, located in dum dum, about 16 km (9.9 mi) north-east of the city centre, operates domestic and international flights. in 2013, the airport was upgraded to handle increased air traffic.
khidirpore dock of kolkata port trust
the port of kolkata, established in 1870, is india's oldest and the only major river port. the kolkata port trust manages docks in kolkata and haldia. the port hosts passenger services to port blair, capital of the andaman and nicobar islands; freighter service to ports throughout india and around the world is operated by the shipping corporation of india. ferry services connect kolkata with its twin city of howrah, located across the hooghly river.
