kolkata
Sports
sports

see also: football in kolkata, kolkata marathon, and kolkata derby
salt lake stadium on a matchday of the 2017 fifa u-17 world cup
the most popular sports in kolkata are football and cricket. unlike most parts of india, the residents show significant passion for football. indian football association, the oldest football association of the country is based here. it administers football in west bengal. kolkata is home to the country's top football clubs such as mohun bagan a.c., east bengal f.c. and the mohammedan sporting club.the city has two indian super league clubs, atk mohun bagan fc and sc east bengal. calcutta football league, which was started in 1898, is the oldest football league in asia. mohun bagan a.c., one of the oldest football clubs in asia, is the only organisation to be dubbed a "national club of india". football matches between mohun bagan and east bengal, dubbed as the kolkata derby, witness large audience attendance and rivalry between patrons. the multi-use salt lake stadium, also known as yuva bharati krirangan, is india's second largest stadium by seating capacity. most matches of the 2017 fifa u-17 world cup were played in the salt lake stadium including both semi-final matches and the final match. kolkata also accounted for 45% of total attendance in 2017 fifa u-17 world cup with an average of 55,345 spectators. the calcutta cricket and football club is the second-oldest cricket club in the world.
first day and night test match in india between india and bangladesh at the eden gardens
as in the rest of india, cricket is popular in kolkata and is played on grounds and in streets throughout the city. kolkata is home to indian premier league franchise kolkata knight riders and the bengal cricket team; the cricket association of bengal, which regulates cricket in west bengal, is also based in the city. tournaments, especially those involving cricket, football, badminton and carrom, are regularly organised here on an inter-locality or inter-club basis. the maidan, a vast field that serves as the city's largest park, hosts several minor football and cricket clubs and coaching institutes. eden gardens, which has a capacity of 80,000 as of 2017, hosted the final match of the 1987 cricket world cup.
kolkata's netaji indoor stadium served as host of the 1981 asian basketball championship, where india's national basketball team finished 5th, ahead of teams that belong to asia's basketball elite, such as iran. the city has three 18-hole golf courses. the oldest is at the royal calcutta golf club, the first golf club built outside the united kingdom. the other two are located at the tollygunge club and at fort william. the royal calcutta turf club hosts horse racing and polo matches. the calcutta polo club is considered the oldest extant polo club in the world. the calcutta racket club is a squash and racquet club in kolkata. it was founded in 1793, making it one of the oldest rackets clubs in the world, and the first in the indian subcontinent. the calcutta south club is a venue for national and international tennis tournaments; it held the first grass-court national championship in 1946. in the period 2005–2007, sunfeast open, a tier-iii tournament on the women's tennis association circuit, was held in the netaji indoor stadium; it has since been discontinued.
the calcutta rowing club hosts rowing heats and training events. kolkata, considered the leading centre of rugby union in india, gives its name to the oldest international tournament in rugby union, the calcutta cup. the automobile association of eastern india, established in 1904, and the bengal motor sports club are involved in promoting motor sports and car rallies in kolkata and west bengal. the beighton cup, an event organised by the bengal hockey association and first played in 1895, is india's oldest field hockey tournament; it is usually held on the mohun bagan ground of the maidan. athletes from kolkata include sourav ganguly, pankaj roy and jhulan goswami, who are former captains of the indian national cricket team; olympic tennis bronze medalist leander paes, golfer arjun atwal, and former footballers sailen manna, chuni goswami, p. k. banerjee and subrata bhattacharya.
