kollam
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of kollam
names, routes and locations of the periplus of the erythraean sea (1st century ce)
kollam in the 1500s
as the ancient city of quilon, kollam was a flourishing port during the pandya dynasty (c. 3rd century bc–12th century), and later became the capital of the independent venad or the kingdom of quilon on its foundation in c. 825. kollam was considered one of the four early entrepots in global sea trade during the 13th century, along with alexandria and cairo in egypt, the chinese city of quanzhou, and malacca in the malaysian archipelago. it seems that trade at kollam seems to have flourished right into the medieval period as in 1280, there is instance of envoys of yuan china coming to kollam for establishing relations between the local ruler and china
pandya rule[edit]
capture of kollam in 1661
kollam in the 1700s
the ancient political and cultural history of kollam was almost entirely independent from that of the rest of kerala. the chera dynasty governed the area of malabar coast between alappuzha in the south to kasaragod in the north. this included palakkad gap, coimbatore, salem, and kolli hills. the region around coimbatore was ruled by the cheras during sangam period between c. first and the fourth centuries ce and it served as the eastern entrance to the palakkad gap, the principal trade route between the malabar coast and tamil nadu. however the southern region of present-day kerala state (the coastal belt between thiruvananthapuram and alappuzha) was under ay dynasty, who was more related to the pandya dynasty of madurai than cheras.
along with (muziris and tyndis), quilon was an ancient seaport on the malabar coast of india from the early centuries before the christian era. kollam served as a major port city for pandya dynasty on the western coast while kulasekharapatnam served pandyas on the eastern coast. the city had a high commercial reputation from the days of the phoenicians and ancient romans. pliny the elder (23–79 ad) mentions greek ships anchored at muziris and nelcynda. there was also a land route over the western ghats. spices, pearls, diamonds, and silk were exported to egypt and rome from these ports. pearls and diamonds came to the chera kingdom from ceylon and the southeastern coast of india, then known as the pandyan kingdom.
cosmas indicopleustes, a greek nestorian sailor, in his book the christian topography who visited the malabar coast in 550, mentions an enclave of christian believers in male (malabar coast). he writes, "in the island of tabropane (ceylon), there is a church of christians, and clerics and faithful. likewise at male, where the pepper grows, and in the farming community of kalliana (kalliankal at nillackal) there is also a bishop consecrated in persia in accordance with the nicea sunnahadose of 325 ad." the nestorian patriarch jesujabus, who died in 660 ad, mentions kollam in his letter to simon, metropolitan of persia.
kollam is also home to one of the oldest mosques in indian subcontinent. according to the legend of cheraman perumals, the first indian mosque was built in 624 ad at kodungallur with the mandate of the last the ruler (the cheraman perumal) of chera dynasty, who left from dharmadom to mecca and converted to islam during the lifetime of prophet muhammad (c. 570–632). according to qissat shakarwati farmad, the masjids at kodungallur, kollam, madayi, barkur, mangalore, kasaragod, kannur, dharmadam, panthalayini, and chaliyam, were built during the era of malik dinar, and they are among the oldest masjids in indian subcontinent. it is believed that malik dinar died at thalangara in kasaragod town.
capital of venad (9th to 12th centuries)[edit]

see also: kollam port
india in 1320 ce. the kollam-thiruvananthapuram-kanyakumari area in the southernmost tip of indian subcontinent, which was the main seat of ay dynasty and later venad dynasty, was under the influence of pandya dynasty
the port at kollam, then known as quilon, was founded in 825 by the nestorian christians mar sabor and mar proth with sanction from ayyanadikal thiruvadikal, the king of the independent venad or the state of quilon, a feudatory under the chera kingdom.
it is believed that mar sapor iso also proposed that the chera king create a new seaport near kollam in lieu of his request that he rebuild the almost vanished inland seaport at kollam (kore-ke-ni) near backare (thevalakara), also known as nelcynda and tyndis to the romans and greeks and as thondi to the tamils, which had been without trade for several centuries because the cheras were overrun by the pallavas in the sixth century, ending the spice trade from the malabar coast. this allowed the nestorians to stay in the chera kingdom for several decades and introduce the christian faith among the nampoothiri vaishnavites and nair sub-castes in the st. thomas tradition, with the syrian liturgy as a basis for the doctrine of the trinity, without replacing the sanskrit and vedic prayers. the tharisapalli plates presented to maruvan sapor iso by ayyanadikal thiruvadikal granted the christians the privilege of overseeing foreign trade in the city as well as control over its weights and measures in a move designed to increase quilon's trade and wealth. the two christians were also instrumental in founding christian churches with syrian liturgy along the malabar coast, distinct from the ancient vedic advaitam propounded by adi shankara in the early ninth century among the nampoothiri vaishnavites and nair sub castes, as malayalam was not accepted as a liturgical language until the early 18th century.
thus began the malayalam era, known as kolla varsham after the city, indicating the importance of kollam in the ninth century. the persian merchant soleyman of siraf visited malabar in the ninth century and found quilon to be the only port in india used by the huge chinese ships as their transshipment hub for goods on their way from china to the persian gulf. the rulers of kollam (formerly called 'desinganadu') had trade relations with china and exchanged embassies. according to the records of the tang dynasty (618–913), quilon was their chief port of call before the seventh century. the chinese trade decreased about 600 and was again revived in the 13th century. mirabilia descripta by bishop catalani gives a description of life in kollam, which he saw as the catholic bishop-designate to kollam, the oldest catholic diocese in india. he also gives true and imaginary descriptions of life in 'india the major' in the period before marco polo visited the city. sulaiman al-tajir, a persian merchant who visited kerala during the reign of sthanu ravi varma (9th century ce), records that there was extensive trade between kerala and china at that time, based at the port of kollam.
ancestral lands of christopher columbus[edit]
kollam (marked as quilon) on the old map of india.
in 13th century ce, maravarman kulasekara pandyan i, a pandya ruler fought a war in venad and captured the city of kollam. the city appears on the catalan atlas of 1375 ce as columbo and colobo. the map marks this city as a christian city, ruled by a christian ruler.
the text above the picture of the king says:
açí seny[o]reja lo rey colobo, christià. pruvíncia de columbo (here reigns the lord king colobo, christian, province of columbo).
the city was much frequented by the genoese merchants during the 13th-14th centuries ce, followed by the dominican and franciscan friars from europe. the genoese merchants called the city colõbo/colombo.
in 1329 ce pope john xxii established kollam / columbo as the first and only roman catholic bishopric on the indian subcontinent, and appointed jordan of catalonia, a dominican friar, as the diocese's first bishop of the latin sect. the pope's latin scribes assigned the name "columbum" to columbo.
according to a book authored by ilarius augustus, published april, 2021 ('christopher columbus: buried deep in latin the indian origin of the great explorer from genoa'), the words columbum, columbus and columbo appear for the very first time in a notarial deed (lease contract) of a certain mousso in genoa in 1329 ce. these words appear in the form of a toponym. the author then shows, through the latin text of several other notarial deeds and the documents on church history, how christopher columbus - also carrying the same toponym.- was part of mousso's family, and hence of the indian lineage (although born in genoa).
kozhikode influences[edit]
the port at kozhikode held superior economic and political position in medieval kerala coast, while kannur, kollam, and kochi, were commercially important secondary ports, where the traders from various parts of the world would gather.
portuguese, dutch and british trade and influences (16th to 18th centuries)[edit]
thambiran vanakkam was printed at kollam, the capital of venad in 1578, during the portuguese era. it holds the record of the first book printed in any indian language. it was written in the language lingua malabar tamul, which was spoken in southern kerala (kollam-thiruvananthapuram area) during the medieval period.
viceroy afonso de albuquerque established portuguese rule in kollam (portuguese: coulão), which lasted from 1502 until 1661.
kollam fort in 1756 after it had passed from portuguese rule to the dutch
the portuguese arrived at kappad kozhikode in 1498 during the age of discovery, thus opening a direct sea route from europe to india. they were the first europeans to establish a trading center in tangasseri, kollam in 1502, which became the centre of their trade in pepper. in the wars with the moors/arabs that followed, the ancient church (temple) of st thomas tradition at thevalakara was destroyed. in 1517, the portuguese built the st. thomas fort in thangasseri, which was destroyed in the subsequent wars with the dutch. in 1661, the dutch east india company took possession of the city. the remnants of the old portuguese fort, later renovated by the dutch, can be found at thangasseri. in the 18th century, travancore conquered kollam, followed by the british in 1795. thangasseri remains today as an anglo-indian settlement, though few anglo-indians remain. the infant jesus church in thangasseri, an old portuguese-built church, remains as a memento of the portuguese rule of the area.
battle of quilon[edit]

main article: battle of quilon
the battle of quilon was fought in 1809 between a troop of the indian kingdom of travancore led by the then dalawa (prime minister) of travancore, velu thampi dalawa and the british east india company led by colonel chalmers at cantonment maidan in quilon. the battle lasted for only six hours and was the result of the east india company's invasion of quilon and their garrison situated near the cantonment maidan. the company forces won the battle while all the insurrectionist who participated in the war were court-martialed and subsequently hanged at the maidan.
travancore rule[edit]
in the early 18th century ce, the travancore royal family adopted some members from the royal family of kolathunadu based at kannur, and parappanad based in present-day malappuram district. later, venad kingdom was completely merged with the kingdom of travancore during the rein of marthanda varma and kollam remained as the capital of travancore kingdom. later on, the capital of travancore was relocated to thiruvananthapuram.
travancore became the most dominant state in kerala by defeating the powerful zamorin of kozhikode in the battle of purakkad in 1755. the government secretariat was also situated in kollam till the 1830s. it was moved to thiruvananthapuram during the reign of swathi thirunal.
excavation at kollam port seabed[edit]
excavations are going on at kollam port premises since february 2014 as the team has uncovered arrays of antique artifacts, including chinese porcelain and coins. a chinese team with the palace museum, a team from india with kerala council for historical research (kchr) discovered chinese coins and artifacts that show trade links between kollam and ancient china.
