kollam
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in kollam
air[edit]

see also: kollam airport
old kollam airport area, asramam
the city corporation of kollam is served by the trivandrum international airport, which is about 56 kilometers from the city via nh66 . trivandrum international airport is the first international airport in a non-metro city in india.
rail[edit]

see also: kollam junction railway station
kollam junction is the second largest railway station in kerala in area, after shoranur junction, with a total of 6 platforms. the station has 17 rail tracks. kollam junction has world's third longest railway platform, measuring 1180.5 m(3873 ft). mainline electrical multiple unit (memu) have a maintenance shed at kollam junction. the memu services started from kollam to ernakulam via alappuzha and kottayam in the second week of january 2012. by 1 december 2012, memu service between kollam and nagercoil became a reality and later extended up to kanyakumari. kollam memu shed inaugurated on 1 december 2013 for the maintenance works of memu rakes. kollam memu shed is the largest memu shed in kerala, which is equipped with most modern facilities. there is a long-standing demand for the kollam town railway station in the kollam-perinad stretch and "s.n college railway station" in the kollam-eravipuram stretch. the railway stations in kollam city are kollam junction railway station, eravipuram railway station and kilikollur railway station.
a new suburban rail system has been proposed by the kerala government and indian railways on the route thiruvananthapuram - kollam - haripad/chengannur for which mrvc is tasked to conduct a study and submit a report. ten trains, each with seven coaches, will transport passengers back and forth along the trivandrum-kollam-chengannur-kottarakara-adoor section.
road[edit]
the city of kollam is connected to almost all the cities and major towns in the state, including trivandrum, alappuzha, kochi, palakkad, kottayam, kottarakkara, and punalur, and with other indian cities through the nh 66, nh 183, nh 744 - and other state pwd roads. road transport is provided by state-owned kerala state road transport corporation (ksrtc) and private transport bus operators. kollam is one among the five ksrtc zones in kerala. road transport is also provided by private taxis and autorickshaws, also called autos. there is a city private bus stand at andamukkam. there is a ksrtc bus station beside ashtamudi lake. buses to various towns in kerala and interstate services run from this station.
dalavapuram bridge near kollam city - this bridge had given a new way of connectivity for the people of dalavapuram with kollam city along with the existing boat serviceskollam bypass - the 13.141 km (8.165 mi) long kollam bypass project was actually planned in 1975 but works got delayed due to political and financial issueskollam ksrtc bus station is situated at the banks of famous ashtamudi lake. one of the main bus stations in the state, still waiting to get a makeover.traffic on the thevally bridge connecting thevally to kottayathukadavu, over national waterway 3, ashtamudi lake
water[edit]
houseboat passing under thevally bridge
the state water transport department operates boat services to west kallada, munroe island, guhanandapuram, dalavapuram and alappuzha from kollam kswtd ferry terminal situated on the banks of the ashtamudi lake. asramam link road in the city passes adjacent to the ferry terminal.
double decker luxury boats run between kollam and allepey daily. luxury boats, operated by the government and private owners, operate from the main boat jetty during the tourist season. the west coast canal system, which starts from thiruvananthapuram in the south and ends at hosdurg in the north, passes through paravur, the city of kollam and karunagappally taluk.
kollam port is the second largest port in kerala, after cochin port trust. it is one of two international ports in kerala. cargo handling facilities began operation in 2013. foreign ships arrive in the port regularly with the mv alina, a 145-metre (476 ft) vessel registered in antigua anchored at the port on 4 april 2014. once the port starts functioning in full-fledged, it will make the transportation activities of kollam-based cashew companies more easy. shreyas shipping company is now running a regular container service between kollam port and kochi port.
