kollam
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

main article: economy of kollam
the city life of kollam has changed in the last decade. in terms of economic performance and per capita income, kollam city is in fifth position from india and third in kerala. kollam is famous as a city with excellent export background. 5 star, 4 star and 3 star hotels, multi-storied shopping malls, branded jewellery, textile showrooms and car showrooms have started operations in the city and suburbs. kollam was the third city in kerala (after kozhikode and kochi) to adopt the shopping mall culture. kollam district ranks first in livestock wealth in the state. downtown kollam is the main cbd of kollam city.
rp mall, kollam - kollam was the third city in kerala (after kochi and kozhikode) to adopt the shopping mall culture
a large chinese fishing net at ashtamudi lake in kollam city
dairy farming is fairly well developed. also there is a chilling plant in the city. kollam is an important maritime and port city. fishing has a place in the economy of the district. neendakara and sakthikulangara villages in the suburbs of the city have fisheries. an estimated 134,973 persons are engaged in fishing and allied activities. cheriazheekkal, alappad, pandarathuruthu, puthenthura, neendakara, thangasseri, eravipuram and paravur are eight of the 26 important fishing villages. there are 24 inland fishing villages. the government has initiated steps for establishing a fishing harbour at neendakara. average fish landing is estimated at 85,275 tonnes per year. one-third of the state's fish catch is from kollam. nearly 3000 mechanised boats are operating from the fishing harbour. ffda and vffda promote fresh water fish culture and prawn farming respectively. a fishing village with 100 houses is being built at eravipuram. a prawn farm is being built at ayiramthengu, and several new hatcheries are planned to cater to the needs of the aquaculturists. kerala's only turkey farm and a regional poultry farm are at kureepuzha.
there are two central government industrial operations in the city, the indian rare earths, chavara and parvathi mills ltd., kollam. kerala ceramics ltd. in kundara, kerala electrical and allied engineering company in kundara, kerala premo pipe factory in chavara, kerala minerals and metals limited in chavara and united electrical industries in kollam are kerala government-owned companies. other major industries in the private/cooperative sector are aluminium industries ltd. in kundara, thomas stephen & co. in kollam, floorco in paravur and cooperative spinning mill in chathannoor. the beach sands of the district have concentrations of such heavy minerals as ilmenite, rutile, monosite and zircon, which offer scope for exploitation for industrial purposes.
technopark kollam
besides large deposits of china clay in kundara, mulavana and chathannoor, there are also lime-shell deposits in ashtamudi lake and bauxite deposits in adichanallur.
known as the "cashew capital of the world", kollam is noted for its traditional cashew business and is home to more than 600 cashew-processing units. every year, about 800,000 tonnes of raw cashews are imported into the city for processing and an average of 130,000 tonnes of processed cashews are exported to various countries worldwide. the cashew export promotion council of india (cepci) expects a rise in exports to 275,000 tonnes by 2020, an increase of 120 per cent over the current figure. the kerala state cashew development corporation limited (kscdc) is situated at mundakkal in kollam city. the company owns 30 cashew factories all across kerala. of these, 24 are located in kollam district.
kollam is one of many seafood export hubs in india with numerous companies involved in the sector. most of these are based in the maruthadi, sakthikulangara, kavanad, neendakara, asramam, kilikollur, thirumullavaram and uliyakovil areas of the city. capithans, kings marine exporters, india food exports and oceanic fisheries are examples of seafood exporters.

see also: ashtamudi lake
kollam's ashtamudi lake clam fishery was the first marine stewardship council (msc) certified fishery in india. the clam fishery supports around 3,000 people involved in the collection, cleaning, processing and trading of clams. around 90 species of fish and ten species of clams are found in the lake.
