kollam
Tourist places[edit]
tourist places[edit]
places of worship[edit]
hindus and temples
kottarakkara sree mahaganapathi kshethram
anandavalleeshwaram sri mahadevar temple is a 400 years old ancient hindu temple in the city. the 400-year-old sanctum sanctorum of this temple is finished in teak. ammachiveedu muhurthi temple is another major temple in the city that have been founded around 600 years ago by the ammachi veedu family, aristocrats from kollam. the kollam pooram, a major festival of kollam, is the culmination of a ten-day festival, normally in mid april, of asramam sree krishna swamy temple. kottankulangara devi temple is one of the world-famous hindu temples in kerala were cross-dressing of men for chamayavilakku ritual is a part of traditional festivities. the men also carry large lamps. the first of the two-day dressing event drew to a close early on monday. moreover, kottarakkara sree mahaganapathi kshethram in kottarakkara, puttingal devi temple in paravur, sooranad north anayadi pazhayidam sree narasimha swami temple poruvazhy peruviruthy malanada temple in poruvazhy, sasthamcotta sree dharma sastha temple in sasthamkotta, sakthikulangara sree dharma sastha temple, thrikkadavoor sree mahadeva temple in kadavoor and kattil mekkathil devi temple in ponmana padanayarkulangara mahadeva temple karunagappally, ashtamudi sree veerabhadra swamy temple are the other famous hindu worship centres in the kollam metropolitan area.
christianity and churches
new cathedral in tangasseri, kollam
the infant jesus cathedral in tangasseri is established by portuguese during 1614. it is now the pro-cathedral of roman catholic diocese of quilon – the ancient and first catholic diocese of india. the church remains as a memento of the portuguese rule of old quilon city. st. sebastian's church at neendakara is another important church in the city. the dutch church in munroe island is built by the dutch in 1878. our lady of velankanni shrine in cutchery is another important christian worship place in kollam city. saint casimir church in kadavoor, holy family church in kavanad, st.stephen's church in thoppu and st.thomas church in kadappakada are some of the other major christian churches in kollam.
muslims and mosques
karunagappally mosque
kottukadu juma masjid in chavara, elampalloor juma-a-masjid, valiyapalli in jonakappuram, chinnakada juma masjid, juma-'ath palli in kollurvila, juma-'ath palli in thattamala and koivila juma masjid in chavara are the other major mosques in kollam.
