kollam
Civic administration[edit]
civic administration[edit]

main article: kollam municipal corporation

see also: kollam city police
british residency in asramam, kollam - till 1829, quilon was the capital of the travancore state with the headquarters of the british residency situated here
kollam city is a municipal corporation with elected councillors from its 55 divisions. the mayor, elected from among the councillors, generally represents the political party holding a majority. the corporation secretary heads the office of the corporation.
map of kollam metropolitan area
the present mayor of kollam corporation is adv.v. rajendrababu of cpi(m).
the police administration of the city falls under the kollam city police commissionerate which is headed by an ips (indian police service) cadre officer and he reports to the inspector general of police (igp) thiruvananthapuram range. the police administration comes under the state home department of the government of kerala. kollam city is divided into three subdivisions, karunagappally, kollam and chathannoor, each under an assistant commissioner of police.
urban structure[edit]

main article: kollam metropolitan area
with a total urban population of 1,187,158 and 349,033 as city corporation's population, kollam is the fourth most populous city in the state and 49th on the list of the most populous urban agglomerations in india.  as of 2011 the city's urban growth rate of 154.59% was the second highest in the state. the metropolitan area of kollam includes uliyakovil, adichanalloor, adinad, ayanivelikulangara, chavara, elampalloor, eravipuram (part), kallelibhagom, karunagappally, kollam, kottamkara, kulasekharapuram, mayyanad, meenad, nedumpana, neendakara, oachira, panayam, panmana, paravur, perinad, poothakkulam, thazhuthala, thodiyoor, thrikkadavoor, thrikkaruva, thrikkovilvattom, and vadakkumthala.
the kerala government has decided to develop the city of kollam as a "port city of kerala". regeneration of the maruthadi-eravipuram area including construction of facilities for fishing, tourism and entertainment projects will be implemented as part of the project
