kollam
Education[edit]
education[edit]

main article: education in kollam district
tkm engineering college in karicode
there are many respected colleges, schools and learning centres in kollam. the city and suburbs contribute greatly to education by providing the best and latest knowledge to the scholars. the thangal kunju musaliar college of engineering, the first private school of its kind in the state, is at kilikollur, about 7 km (4.3 mi) east of kollam city, and is a source of pride for all kollamites. the government of kerala has granted academic autonomy to fatima mata national college, another prestigious institution in the city. sree narayana college, bishop jerome institute (an integrated campus providing architecture, engineering and management courses), and travancore business academy are other important colleges in the city. there are two law colleges in the city, sree narayana guru college of legal studies under the control of sree narayana trust and n s s law college managed by the n.s.s. there are also some best schools in kollam including trinity lyceum school, infant jesus school, st aloysius h.s.s, the oxford school, sri sri academy etc.
sree narayana guru college of legal studies in karbala
kerala state institute of design (ksid), a design institute under department of labour and skills, government of kerala, is located at chandanathope in kollam. it was established in 2008 and was one of the first state-owned design institutes in india. ksid currently conducts post graduate diploma programs in design developed in association with national institute of design, ahmedabad.
indian institute of infrastructure and construction (iiic-kollam) is an institute of international standards situated at chavara in kollam city to support the skill development programmes for construction related occupations. the institute of fashion technology, kollam, kerala is a fashion technology institute situated at vellimon, established in technical collaboration with the national institute of fashion technology and the ministry of textiles. in addition, there are two imk (institute of management, kerala) extension centres active in the city. kerala maritime institute is situated at neendakara in kollam city to give maritime training for the students in kerala. more than 5,000 students have been trained at neendakara maritime institute under the boat crew training programme.
apart from colleges, there are a number of bank coaching centres in kollam. kollam is known as india's hub for bank test coaching centres with around 40 such institutes in the district. students from various indian states such as tamil nadu, karnataka, andhra pradesh, bihar and madhya pradesh also come here for coaching.
