kota-rajasthan
History[edit]
history[edit]

see also: kota state
procession of raja ram singh ii of kota later mughal period, c. 1850
the history of the city dates back to the 12th century ce when rao deva, a chauhan rajput chieftain belonging to the hada clan conquered the territory and founded bundi and hadoti. later, in the early 17th century, during the reign of the mughal emperor jahangir, the ruler of bundi – rao ratan singh, gave the smaller principality of kota to his son, madho singh. since then kota became a hallmark of the rajput gallantry and culture.
princely city: kota (कोटा)   region  hadoti   19th-century flag     independence from:  bundi state   state existed:  1579–1949   dynasties  rajput chauhan hada   capital  kota
diwali celebrations at kota, 1690s
kota became an independent state in 1631 when rao madho singh, the second son of rao ratan of [bundi] was made the ruler, by the mughal emperor jahangir. soon kota outgrew its parent state to become bigger in area, richer in revenue and more powerful. maharao bhim singh played a pivotal role in kota's history, having held a 'mansab' of five thousand and being the first in his dynasty to have the title of maharao. zalim singh, a diplomat, and statesman, emerged as another prominent figure of the state in the 18th century. although initially being a general of kota's army, he rose to the regent of the kingdom after the king died leaving a minor on the throne. he remained a direct administrator of the state. in 1817, a treaty of friendship was signed between him and the british on his condition of carving out part from the existing state for his descendants resulting in jhalawar coming into existence in 1838. kota was not involved in the earlier events of the indian rebellion of 1857. however, when in october 1857 rebels murdered the local british resident and his two sons, british forces responded by storming the city and, after some resistance, capturing it in march 1858.
in the 1940s, social activist guru radha kishan organised trade union activities and campaigned against the colonial government. he left kota after the local administration learned of the arrest warrant issued against him for his participation in indian independence activities.
princely city of kota[edit]

see also: hadoti
kota became independent in 1579, after bundi state in hadoti region had become weak. then, kota ruled the territory which now is kota district and baran district.
