kota-rajasthan
Education[edit]
education[edit]
the city is especially known in india as a center for the preparation of various national level competitive examinations through which the students seek admissions in various engineering and medical colleges of the country. often termed as the "kota factory", the town contains more than 40 large coaching institutes for aspiring students trying to pass entrance exams for indian institutes of technology (iit), through the iit jee, other engineering colleges and prominent medical colleges of india.
since 2000, the city has emerged as a popular coaching destination for competitive exams preparation and for profit educational services. the education sector of kota has become one of the major contributors to the city's economy. kota is popularly referred to as "the coaching capital of india". over 150,000 students from all over the country flock every year towards the city for preparation of various exams such as iit-jee and neet-ug etc. many  hostels and pgs are located in kota near the vicinity of coaching centres for students. students live here for 2–3 years and prepare for the exams. the annual turnover of the kota coaching industry is about ₹1500 crore. the majority of the students here are enrolled in schools, providing the facility of "dummy schooling", which gives students admissions without the need to attend it regularly. however, it is an illegal practice. in 2019, the viral fever launched a web series called kota factory to shed light on the life of students who study at kota.
kota's emergence as a coaching hub began in 1985 when vinod kumar bansal, an engineer set up bansal classes that eventually became bansal classes private limited.
student suicides[edit]
in the past few years, reports of students dying by suicide in the city have increased. as per reports, students feel stressed and get pressurized in order to crack their target competitive exam. as per national crime records bureau report of 2014, 45 suicide cases of students were reported in the city. in year 2015, 17 such cases were found. for the same cause, many coaching centers have also appointed counsellors and are organising recreational activities to help students.
colleges[edit]
government medical college, kota university engineering college, kota
universities[edit]
agriculture university, kota indian institute of information technology, kota rajasthan technical university university of kota vardhaman mahaveer open university
