kota-rajasthan
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
the city is the trade centre for an area in which cotton, millet, wheat, coriander and oilseeds are grown; industries include cotton and oilseed milling, textile weaving, distilling, dairying, and the manufacture of metal handcrafts. kota also has an extensive industry of stone-polishing (tiles) of a stone called kota stone, used for the floor and walls of residential and business buildings. since last 15 years kota has emerged as an education hub of the country as producing excellent results in iit-jee and medical entrance exams.
kota educational industry[edit]
a major part of kota's economy depends on its student population. every year more than 150,000 students visit and study in kota to study and prepare for jee and neet.
the entrance coaching industry in kota generates business of about ₹40,000 million from them which further contributes towards the economy of the region. over time, the economical growth and money generated through education in kota seems to have overtaken other popular economical activities of the region by contributing more and more with time.
kota doria or kota doriya and sarees[edit]

main article: kota doria
kota sari with gota patti embroidery
weaving in kota was started by maharana bhimdev in the 18th century.
the kota saris like most traditional piece of work had started becoming lost before designer vidhi singhania moved to kota and started working with the workers to revive its market. many textile shops in the city sell different varieties of kota doriya. these saris have become one of the trademarks of the city.
kota stone[edit]
storage area of kota stone

main article: kota stone
the fine-grained variety of limestone quarried from kota district is known as kota stone, with rich greenish-blue and brown colours. kota stone is tough, non-water-absorbent, non-slip, and non-porous. the varieties include kota blue natural, kota blue honed, kota blue polished, kota blue cobbles, kota brown natural and kota brown polished.
industries[edit]
kota is one of the industrial hubs in northern india, with chemical, cement, engineering and power plants based there. the total number of industrial units in the district in 2010–11 stood at 12908 with 705 registered units. the district power plants show annual growth of 15–20% due to their strategic locations.
power plants[edit]
kota is surrounded by five power stations within its 50 km radius.
kota super thermal power plant – thermal rajasthan atomic power station in rawatbhata chittorgarh district (65 kilometres from kota) – nuclear ntpc anta gas power plant in antah baran district (50 kilometers from kota) – gas jawahar sagar power plant – hydro kalisindh thermal power station (in jhalrapatan, jhalawar) – thermal surya chambal power plant in rangpur kota district - biomass
