kota-rajasthan
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
kota is well connected with road and rail to all major cities within rajasthan as well as those located outside the state.
roadways[edit]
kota have two major interstate bus terminals, namely, nayapura bus stand at nayapura and roadways new bus stand at ramchandrapura. national highway no.27 (via udaipur, kanpur, gorakhpur, guwahati) and national highway no.52 (via hisar, churu, sikar, jaipur, indore, aurangabad, solapur and hubli) pass through the kota city. national highway no.27 is a part of east-west corridor(porbandar - silchar) and national highway no.52 connects punjab to karnataka (sangrur, punjab—ankola, karnataka). the total road length in kota district is 2,052 km as of march 2011. there are also three upcoming expressway projects in the form of delhi–mumbai expressway (via kota, rajasthan and vadodara), kota–hyderabad expressway (via indore) and chambal expressway.
railways[edit]
entrance of kota railway station
kota is well connected to all the major cities of india with rail. kota junction is one of the divisions in west central railway. it is a station on the new delhi–mumbai main line. there are four railway stations within kota and in its vicinity. one substation of east kota city is sogariya(kota bypass) railway station and another suburban station of south kota city is dakaniya talav railway station which has a stoppage of avadh express, dehradun express and ranthambore express.
the city is a halt for over 182 trains, including mumbai rajdhani express, august kranti rajdhani express, thiruvananthapuram rajdhani express, madgaon rajdhani express, mumbai new delhi duronto express, golden temple mail, paschim express, bandra terminus-hazrat nizamuddin garib rath express, kevadiya–hazrat nizamuddin gujarat sampark kranti express, gujarat sampark kranti express, maharashtra sampark kranti express, goa sampark kranti express, kerala sampark kranti express, indore–jaipur express, gangaur superfast express, mewar express, dayodaya express, jodhpur – indore intercity, hazrat nizamuddin - indore express, garbha express, marusagar express (ajmer – ernakulam express / ernakulam express), jaipur–mysore superfast express, swaraj express, chennai central–jaipur superfast express, coimbatore–jaipur superfast express, jodhpur – puri express, bandra terminus–gorakhpur avadh express, bandra terminus–muzaffarpur avadh express, jodhpur – bhopal express.
the delhi—mumbai railway line passes through the kota junction. the district has 148.83 km of railway line in the kota – ruthia section, 98.72 km on nagda—mathura (mumbai-delhi) section and 24.26 km on kota —chittorgarh section.
a broad-gauge railway facility between kota and jodhpur via jaipur exists.
airways[edit]
kota airport, (iata: ktu, icao: viko) is a civil airport serving kota, rajasthan, india. spread over 447 acres, kota airport was originally built by the royal family of the princely state of kota and was taken over by the government in 1951. this airport also known as rajputana airport. originally serviced by indian airlines dakota aircraft and later by vayudoot and jagson airlines, shutdown of major industries and kota becoming a major railway junction effected decreased demand for air transport and the withdrawal of the airlines. kota airport has had no scheduled services operating since 1999. the nearest international airport is jaipur international airport situated around 240 km away from kota. development of greenfield airport at kota: the representative of rajasthan government intimated that runway length of existing kota airport is only 4000 ft., which restricts flight operations under rcs. a new greenfield airport is to be constructed in kota. state government has earmarked required land for this purpose. state government has provided meteorological information of past 10 years and aai has carried out pre- feasibility survey & provided its report to the state government. further, aai has been requested twice to carry out site and ols survey and to provide further course of action to be taken by the state government, which is approved. directions need to be issued to aai for early completion of the same. for development of greenfield airport at kota, 1250 acres of land acquired by the state government and handed over to aai for development of new greenfield airport.
