kozhikode
Demographics[edit]
demographics[edit]

main article: demographics of kozhikode district
religion in kozhikode city (2011)    hinduism (57.37%)  islam (37.66%)  christianity (4.60%)  other (0.37%)
total population under municipal corporation limits is 550,440. males form 47.7% and females 52.3%.
kozhikode has been a multi-ethnic and multi-religious town since the early medieval period. the hindus form the largest religious group, followed by muslims and christians. hindus form the majority at 57.37% of the population with 315807 members. muslims form 37.6% of the population with 207298 members.
the corporation of kozhikode has an average literacy rate of 96.8% (national average is 74.85%). the male literacy rate is 97.93% and female literacy rate is 95.78%.
pre-modern kozhikode was already teeming with people of several communities and regional groups. most of these communities continued to follow their traditional occupations and customs till the 20th century. brahmins, too, lived in the city mostly around the hindu temples. regional groups like the tamil brahmins, gujaratis and marwari jains became part of the city and lived around their shrines.
the nairs formed the rulers, warriors and landed gentry of kozhikode.the thiyyas formed the vaidyars (ayurveda physicians), local militia and traders of kozhikode. the thiyyas were also heavily recruited into the zamorin's army.samoothiri army was called as lokar,which constituted of warriors of thiyyar and nair caste soldiers.zamorin also had an army called the 'thiyyarpada' (thiyya army),which is formed by thiyyar warriors. the samoothiri had a ten thousand strong nair bodyguard called the kozhikkottu pathinaayiram (the 10,000 of kozhikode) who defended the capital and supported the administration within the city. he had a larger force of 30,000 nairs in his capacity as the prince of eranadu, called the kozhikkottu muppatinaayiram (the 30,000 of kozhikode). the nairs also formed the members of the suicide squad (chaver).  the muslims of kozhikode are known as mappilas, and according to the official kozhikode website "the great majority of them are sunnis following the shafi school of thought. there are some smaller communities among the muslims such as dawoodi bohras of gujarati origin. many of the muslims living in the historic part of the city follow matrilineality and are noted for their piety. though christianity is believed to have been introduced in kerala in the 1st century ce, the size of community in malabar (northern kerala) began to rise only after the arrival of the portuguese missionaries towards the close of the 15th century. a few christians of thiruvitankoor and kochi have lately migrated to the hilly regions of the district and are settled there.
the tamil brahmins are primarily settled around the tali siva temple. they arrived in kozhikode as dependants of chieftains, working as cooks, cloth merchants and moneylenders. they have retained their tamil language and dialects as well as caste rituals. the gujarati community is settled mostly around the jain temple in and around the valliyangadi. they owned many establishments, especially textile and sweet shops. they must have arrived in kozhikode at least from the beginning of the 14th century. they belong to either the hindu or the jain community. a few marwari families are also found in kozhikode who was basically moneylenders.
