kozhikode
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

calicut is one of the biggest economic hubs in kerala. service sector dominates the economy followed by industries. nedungadi bank, the first and oldest bank in the modern state of kerala, was established by appu nedungadi at kozhikode in the year 1899. cyberpark, a government of kerala organisation, plans  to build, operate and manage it parks for the promotion and development of investment in it and ites industries in the malabar region of kerala. it would be the third it hub in the state of kerala. the two it parks might create a total 100,000 direct job opportunities. the first project is the development of cyberpark hub in kozhikode with its spokes at kannur and kazargode it parks. other planned projects include the birla it park (at mavoor) and malaysian satellite city (at kinaloor) where kinfra has plans to set up a 160-hectare (400-acre) industrial park. in 2012, kozhikode was given the tag of "city of sculptures" (shilpa nagaram) because of the architectural sculptures around the city. currently there are many it companies running in ul cyberpark, government cyberpark and hilite business park.
shopping[edit]
the focus mall, the first shopping mall of its kind in the state

main article: shopping malls in calicut
the city has a strong mercantile aspect. the main area of business was once valiyangadi (big bazaar) near the railway station. as time progressed, it shifted to other parts of the city. the commercial heart has moved to mittai theruvu (sweetmeat street or s. m. street), a long street crammed with shops that sell everything from saris to cosmetics. it also houses restaurants and sweetmeat shops. today, the city has multiple shopping malls. focus mall (first mall of kerala ), hilite mall, gokulam mall, address mall and rp mall are a few among them. lulu group international's lulu mall is under construction in the areas of mankavu.
music[edit]
in addition to the malabar mahotsavam, the annual cultural fest of kozhikode, every year since 1981 the tyagaraja aradhana trust has been conducting a five-day music festival in honour of tyagaraja. the festival is complete with the uncchavritti, rendering of divyanama kritis, pancharatna kritis, concerts by professional artistes and students of music from morning to late in the evening.
kozhikode has a tradition of ghazal and hindustani music appreciation. there are many malayalam ghazals. the late film director and play back singer m. s. baburaj, from kozhikode was influenced by ghazal and hindustani.
