kozhikode
History[edit]
history[edit]

see also: calicut (kingdom)
names, routes and locations of the periplus of the erythraean sea (1st century ce)
the ancient port of tyndis which was located on the northern side of muziris, as mentioned in the periplus of the erythraean sea, was somewhere around kozhikode. its exact location is a matter of dispute. the suggested locations are ponnani, tanur, beypore-chaliyam-kadalundi-vallikkunnu, and koyilandy. tyndis was a major center of trade, second only to muziris, between the cheras and the roman empire. pliny the elder (1st century ce) states that the port of tyndis was located at the northwestern border of keprobotos (chera dynasty). the north malabar region, which lies north of the port at tyndis, was ruled by the kingdom of ezhimala during sangam period. according to the periplus of the erythraean sea, a region known as limyrike began at naura and tyndis. however   ptolemy mentions only tyndis as limyrike's starting point. the region probably ended at kanyakumari; it thus roughly corresponds to the present-day malabar coast. the value of rome's annual trade with the region was estimated at around 50,000,000 sesterces. pliny the elder mentioned that limyrike was  prone by pirates. the cosmas indicopleustes mentioned that the limyrike was a source of peppers.
in the 14th century, kozhikode conquered larger parts of central kerala after the seize of tirunavaya region from valluvanad, which were under the control of the king of perumbadappu swaroopam (cochin). the ruler of perumpadappu was forced to shift his capital (c. ce 1405) further south from kodungallur to kochi. in the 15th century, the status of cochin was reduced to a vassal state of kozhikode, thus leading to the emergence of kozhikode as the most powerful kingdom in medieval malabar coast.during the 15th century kalaripayat was important in the history of malabar, some warriors lived, most notably puthooram veettil aromal chekavar and his sister unniyarcha who were chieftains of martial arts.
the port at kozhikode held the superior economic and political position in medieval kerala coast, while kannur, kollam, and kochi, were commercially important secondary ports, where the traders from various parts of the world would gather. kozhikode was the capital of an independent kingdom ruled by the samoothiris (zamorins) in the middle ages and later of the erstwhile malabar district under british rule. arab merchants traded with the region as early as 7th century, and portuguese explorer vasco da gama landed at kozhikode on 20 may 1498, thus opening a trade route between europe and india. a portuguese factory and the fort was intact in kozhikode for short period (1511–1525, until the fall of calicut). the english landed in 1615 (constructing a trading post in 1665), followed by the french (1698) and the dutch (1752). in 1765, mysore captured kozhikode as part of its occupation of the malabar coast. kozhikode, once a famous cotton-weaving centre, gave its name to the calico cloth.
vasco da gama's arrival in calicut in 1498 ushered in five centuries of rule of the portuguese empire in india, lasting until 1961.
it was ranked eleventh among tier-ii indian cities in job creation by a study conducted by assocham in 2007.
early kozhikode in foreign accounts[edit]
accounts of the city and the conditions prevailing then can be gleaned from the chronicles of travellers who visited the port city.
uru, a type of ship that was historically used for maritime trade, built at beypore, kozhikode
ibn battuta (1342–1347), who visited six times, gives the earliest glimpses of life in the city. he describes kozhikode as "one of the great ports of the district of malabar" where "merchants of all parts of the world are found here". the king of this place, he says, "shaves his chin just as the haidari fakeers of rome do... the greater part of the muslim merchants of this place are so wealthy that one of them can purchase the whole freightage of such vessels put here and fit out others like them".
image of kozhikode, india from georg braun and frans hogenberg's atlas civitates orbis terrarum, 1572
ma huan (1403 ad), the chinese sailor part of the imperial chinese fleet under cheng ho (zheng he) lauds the city as a great emporium of trade frequented by merchants from around the world. he makes note of the 20 or 30 mosques built to cater to the religious needs of the muslims, the unique system of calculation by the merchants using their fingers and toes (followed to this day) and the matrilineal system of succession.
abdur razzak (1442–43) the ambassador of persian emperor sha-rohk finds the city harbour perfectly secured and notices precious articles from several maritime countries especially from abyssinia, zirbad and zanzibar.
the italian niccolò de' conti (1445), perhaps the first christian traveller who noticed kozhikode, describes the city as abounding in pepper, lac, ginger, a larger kind of cinnamon, myrobalans and zedoary. he calls it a noble emporium for all india, with a circumference of 13 kilometres (8 miles).
the russian traveller athanasius nikitin or afanasy nikitin (1468–74) calls 'calecut' a port for the whole indian sea and describes it as having a "big bazaar."
other travellers who visited kozhikode include the italian ludovico di varthema (1503–1508) and duarte barbosa.
the samoothiri[edit]

see also: zamorin of calicut
the path vasco da gama took to reach kozhikode (black line) in 1498, which was also the discovery of a sea route from europe to india, and eventually paved way for the european colonisation of indian subcontinent.
india in early 1320 ce. note that most of the parts of present-day state of kerala was under the influence of the zamorin of kozhikode.
kozhikode and its suburbs formed part of the polanad kingdom, which was a vassal state to the kolathunadu of north malabar,  ruled by the porlatiri. the eradis of nediyiruppu at kondotty in eranad (malappuram district) wanted an outlet to the sea, to initiate trade and commerce with the distant lands. and after fighting with the king polatthiri for 48 years conquered the area around panniankara. after this, menokki became the ruler of polanad and came to terms with the troops and people. after this, the town of kozhikode was founded close to the palace at tali. then, the eradis shifted their headquarters from nediyiruppu to kozhikode. the governor of ernad built a fort at a place called velapuram to safeguard his new interests. the fort most likely lent its name to koyil kotta the precursor to kozhikode. thus the city came into existence sometime in the 13th century ce. the status of udaiyavar increased and he became known as swami nambiyathiri thirumulpad, and eventually samuri or samoothiri. europeans called him in a corrupt form as zamorin.
at the peak of their reign, the zamorins ruled over a region from kollam (quilon) to panthalayini kollam (koyilandy). following the discovery of sea route from europe to kozhikode in 1498, the portuguese began to expand their territories and ruled the seas between ormus and the malabar coast and south to ceylon. kallingal madathil rarichan moopan and pullambil moopan and vamala moopan families were very prominent among those who said that two centuries ago, some jenmis in kozhikode were engaged in sea trade and shipping.
according to k.v. krishna iyer, the rise of kozhikode is at once a cause and a consequence of samoothiri's ascendancy in kerala. by the end of the century, samoothiri was at the zenith of his powers with all princes and chieftains of kerala north of kochi acknowledging his suzerainty. the sweetmeat street (mittayi theruvu) was an important trading street under zamorin's rule.
the first battle of cannanore that occurred in january 1502 between the third portuguese armada and kingdom of cochin under joão da nova and zamorin of calicut's navy marks the beginning of portuguese conflicts in the indian ocean. the defeat of joint fleet of the sultan of gujarat, the mamlûk burji sultanate of egypt, and the zamorin of calicut with support of the republic of venice and the ottoman empire in battle of diu in february 1509 marks the beginning of portuguese dominance of the spice trade and the indian ocean. the continuous wars between zamorin navy under kunjali marakkars and portuguese in the 16th century ce reduced the importance of kozhikode as a centre of trade. the kunjali marakkars are credited with organizing the first naval defense of the indian coast.
the zamorin in the beginning of next century expelled portuguese with the help of dutch east india company. and in 1602, the zamorin sent messages to aceh promising the dutch a fort at kozhikode if they would come and trade there. two factors, hans de wolff and lafer, were sent on an asian ship from aceh, but the two were captured by the chief of tanur, and handed over to the portuguese. a dutch fleet under admiral steven van der hagen arrived at kozhikode in november 1604. it marked the beginning of the dutch presence in kerala and they concluded a treaty with kozhikode on 11 november 1604, which was also the first treaty that the dutch east india company made with an indian ruler. by this time the kingdom and the port of kozhikode was much reduced in importance. the treaty provided for a mutual alliance between the two to expel the portuguese from malabar. in return the dutch east india company was given facilities for trade at kozhikode and ponnani, including spacious storehouses.
british rule[edit]
the arrival of british in kerala can be traced back to the year 1615, when a group under the leadership of captain william keeling arrived at kozhikode, using three ships. it was in these ships that sir thomas roe went to visit jahangir, the fourth mughal emperor, as british envoy. travancore became the most dominant state in kerala by defeating the zamorin of kozhikode in the battle of purakkad in 1755. kozhikode came under british rule after the mysorean conquest of malabar in the late 18th century ce.the british later also formed a regiment called the thiyyar regiment to meet their military operations in malabar.
kozhikode was the capital city of malabar district, one of the two districts in the western coast (malabar coast) of madras presidency. during the british rule, malabar's chief importance lay in producing pepper, coconut, tiles, and teak. kozhikode municipality was formed on 1 november 1866 according to the madras act 10 of 1865 (amendment of the improvements in towns act 1850) of the british indian empire, making it the first modern municipality in the state.
post independence[edit]
kozhikode municipality was upgraded into kozhikode municipal corporation in the year 1962, making it the second-oldest municipal corporation in the state.
