kozhikode
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transportation in kozhikode district
road[edit]
national highways[edit]
ksrtc bus terminal-cum-shopping complex in kozhikodevolvo 8400 at calicut bus terminalthamarassery churam is one of the popular tourist destinations in kozhikode

calicut mini bypass.calicut international airportkozhikode railway station is one of the busiest railway stations in south india
national highway 66 connects kozhikode to mumbai via mangaluru, udupi and goa to the north and kochi and kanyakumari near thiruvananthapuram to the south along the west coast of india. this highway connects the city with the other important towns like, kasaragod, kanhangad, kannur, thalassery, mahe, vadakara, koyilandy ramanattukara, kottakkal, kuttippuram, ponnani, kodungallur, north paravur, ernakulam, edapally and proceeds to alappuzha, thiruvananthapuram and terminates at the southern tip of india, kanyakumari.
national highway 766 connects kozhikode to bangalore through kollegal in karnataka via tirumakudal narsipur, mysore, nanjangud, gundlupet, sulthan bathery, kalpetta and thamarassery.
national highway 966 connects kozhikode to palakkad through malappuram,perinthalmanna. it covers a distance of 125 kilometres (78 mi). at ramanattukara, a suburb of kozhikode, it joins nh 66. it passes through major towns like kondotty, perinthalmanna, and mannarkkad and malappuram. this stretch connects the city and calicut international airport.
state highways[edit]
sh 29 passes through the city. it connects nh 212, malabar christian college, civil station, kunnamangalam, thamarassery, chellot, chitragiri and road to gudallor from kerala border.
state highway 38 starts from pavangad near passes through ulliyeri, perambra, kuttiady, nadapuram, panoor & koothuparamba and ends at chovva in kannur. the highway is107;km long. it is one of the busiest route in the district.
sh 54 connects the city to kalpetta. the highway is 99.0 kilometres (61.5 mi) long. the highway passes through pavangad, kozhikode, ulliyeri, perambra, poozhithodu, peruvannamuzhi and padinjarethara. sh 68 starts from kappad and ends in adivaram. the highway is 68.11 kilometres (42.32 mi) long.
sh 34 starts from koyilandy and ends in edavanna which is 44.0 km long. this highway passes through koyilandi, ulliyeri, balussery, thamarassery, omassery, mukkam.
buses[edit]
buses, predominantly run by individual owners, ply on the routes within the city and to nearby locations. city buses are painted green. kerala state road transport corporation (ksrtc) runs regular services to many destinations in the state and to the neighboring states. the city has three bus stands. all private buses to the suburban and nearby towns ply from the palayam bus stand. private buses to adjoining districts start from the mofussil bus stand on indira gandhi road (mavoor road). buses operated by the ksrtc drive from the ksrtc bus stand on indira gandhi road. ksrtc bus stand kozhikode is the largest bus stand in kerala having a size of 36,036.47 meter square. there are also ksrtc depots in thamarassery, thottilpalam, thiruvambady and vatakara. there are three routes available to bangalore. kozhikode–sulthan bathery-gundlupet–mysore–bangalore is the preferred one and is very busy. another route, is kozhikode-manathavady-kutta-mysore-bangalore. the third one, less used, is kozhikode–gundlupet–chamarajanagar–kollegal–bangalore.
private tour operators maintain regular luxury bus services to mumbai, bangalore, coimbatore, chennai, vellore, ernakulam, trivandrum, ooty, mysore. etc. and mainly operate from the palayam area. these are usually night services.
rail[edit]
the history of railways in kerala dates to 1861 when the first tracks were laid between tirur and beypore.
air[edit]
calicut international airport is 26 kilometres (16 mi) from the city at karipur in kondotty, which is in the  malappuram district. it began operations in 1988. domestic services are operated to major indian cities. it received the status of an international airport in 2006.
