kozhikode
Education[edit]
education[edit]

indian institute of management kozhikodenational institute of technology calicut

main article: educational institutions in kozhikode district

see also: education in kerala and list of educational institutions in kozhikode
there are 1,237 schools in kozhikode district including 191 highschools.
kozhikode is home to two premier educational institutions of national importance: the indian institute of management kozhikode (iimk), and the national institute of technology calicut (nitc). other institutions include national institute for research and development in defence shipbuilding (nirdesh), indian institute of spices research (iisr), and national institute of electronics and information technology (nielit) are also based in calicut.
the university of calicut is the largest university in kerala and is located in thenjipalam, about 24 kilometres (15 mi) south of calicut. this university was established in 1968 and was the second university set up in kerala. most of the colleges offering tertiary education in the region are affiliated to this university. the calicut medical college was established in 1957 as the second medical college in kerala. since then, the institution has grown into a premier centre of medical education in the state. presently it is the largest medical institute in the state with a yearly intake of 250 candidates for the undergraduate programme.
the government law college, kozhikode situated in vellimadukunnu on the out skirts of kozhikode town, is owned by the government of kerala and affiliated to the university of calicut. the college caters to the needs of the north malabar region of kerala it is the third law college in kerala state founded in 1970.
main colleges in calicut city: zamurians guruvayoorappan college, malabar christian college, farook college, devagiri college, providence college for women, govt. arts & science college, meenchantha, west hill government engineering college, kozhikode, kerala government polytechnic college, kozhikode.
in 1877, a school for young rajas was started in kozhikode. this was later thrown open to all caste hindu boys. in 1879, it was affiliated to the university of madras as a second-grade college and with this, collegiate education in the district received a fillip. secondary education recorded appreciable progress since 1915. the erstwhile malabar district, of which the present kozhikode district formed a part, holds a high rank among the districts of madras presidency in secondary education.
