kumbakonam
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
kumbakonam railway station (southern side)
kumbakonam is connected by road and rail. the national highway nh-36 connects vikravandi - manamadurai, passes through this town. the nearest international airport is at tiruchirapalli, which is 91 km (57 mi) from kumbakonam. the nearest seaport is located at nagapattinam which is about 50 km (31 mi) away. the town has around 141 km (88 mi) of roads, 544 municipal roads making up 122.29 km (75.99 mi). there are also around 18.71 km (11.63 mi) of state highways running through kumbakonam. over 87% of the municipal roads are paved.  there are regular government and private bus services to chennai, thanjavur, mannargudi, tiruchirapalli, chidambaram, thiruvarur, mayiladuthurai, nagapattinam, coimbatore, tiruppur, palani, thoothukudi, rameswaram, tiruchendur, salem, edapaddi, vellore, kumuli, cumbum, karaikudi, pudukkottai, neyveli, madurai, sivagangai, thiruthuraipoondi, pattukkottai, muthupet, puducherry, and tirunelveli. the karnataka state road transport corporation (ksrtc) and state express transport corporation (tamil nadu)(setc) operates daily services from bengaluru and mysuru to kumbakonam. on 1 march 1972, the cholan roadways corporation was established by the government of tamil nadu with its headquarters in kumbakonam in order to improve transportation facilities in the districts of central tamil nadu. the organisation acquired the fleets of buses earlier owned by private operators – sri ramavilas service, raman and raman limited and sathi vilas. on 1 july 1997, the organization was renamed tamil nadu state transport corporation, kumbakonam and presently forms division no. 1 of the tamil nadu state transport corporation. the corporation runs a reconditioning unit and a tyre re-threading unit in kumbakonam.
kumbakonam is connected by rail with towns and cities in south india. the mysuru- mayiladuthurai express connects kumbakonam with mysuru and bengaluru. there are regular express trains that connect kumbakonam with major cities in the state like chennai, coimbatore, madurai and tiruchirapalli. there are passenger trains that connect kumbakonam with thanjavur, tiruchirapalli, chidambaram and mayiladuthurai. the upgrading of nh-36 from two-lane to four-line is under progress, which upon completion will greatly reduce to time of travel to thanjavur and chennai.
the traditional modes of transportation are bullock carts. it is recorded that as late as the 1950s, landlords and rich farmers travelled mostly by bullock carts with the exception of rare long journeys which they undertook by buses or motor vehicles. kumbakonam has an efficient local bus transportation system. the town bus stand is located situated just opposite to the moffusil bus station kumbakonam|arignar anna bus stand where the long-distance buses are stationed. there are occasional ferries that transport people and goods across the cauvery. till the beginning of the 20th century, students of the government arts college used to cross the cauvery on coracle ferries in order to attend college. since the construction of a bridge in 1944, the practice of transporting men and goods by coracles has greatly diminished.
