kumbakonam
Education[edit]
education[edit]
government arts college, kumbakonam
the raja veda padasala, established by govinda dikshitar during 1542 in kumbakonam, teaches sanskrit vedic scriptures in specialised fields of rig veda, yajur veda, sama veda, agamas and sastras. kumbakonam emerged as an important centre of education in the late 19th century and was known as the "cambridge of south india". the government arts college, established in kumbakonam in 1867, is one of the oldest educational institutions in the madras presidency. it began as a provincial school on 19 october 1854, before being upgraded to a government college in 1867. it was affiliated to the madras university in 1877. one of the early principals of the college was william archer porter, a cambridge wrangler, who, along with t. gopala rao, was instrumental in its elevation to a government college. he is also credited with framing the college's acclaimed educational policy. in 1881, it became a full-fledged college and high school courses ceased to be taught.  notable faculty members included u. v. swaminatha iyer (1855–1942) while the indian mathematician srinivasa ramanujan (1887–1920) who studied from 1904 until 1906 when he dropped out and v. s. srinivasa sastri (1869–1946), an indian politician and administrator, are its notable alumni. the government arts college for women was started in 1963 and had a total strength of 2,597 pupils in february 2006. the college offers various undergraduate courses and one post-graduate course and is affiliated to the bharathidasan university. other colleges in kumbakonam include idhya colleges of arts and sciences, annai college of arts and sciences, annai engineering college, mass college, sankara arts college, prist university kumbakonam campus, government college of fine arts and arasu engineering college, ksk engineering college, as slam engineering college at nearby thirumanglakudi. the shanmugha arts, science, technology & research academy has a satellite campus based in kumbakonam where all disciplines of engineering, arts and sciences are taught.
the native high school, founded in 1876, and the town higher secondary school, one of whose students was srinivasa ramanujan, were some of the oldest schools in the madras presidency. at present, there a total of 36 government and private schools in kumbakonam.
