kumbakonam
Landmarks[edit]
landmarks[edit]
temples[edit]
mahamaham tank – one of the most prominent landmarks of the town
main article: temples of kumbakonam
kumbakonam is known for its temples and mathas (monasteries). there are around 188 hindu temples within the municipal limits of kumbakonam. apart from these, there several thousand temples around the town thereby giving the town the sobriquets "temple town" and "city of temples".
adi kumbeswarar temple is considered to be the oldest shaiva (the sect of the god shiva) shrine in the town, believed to be constructed by the cholas in the seventh century. the nageswaraswamy temple has a separate shrine for the sun god surya who is believed to have worshipped shiva at this place. adi kumbeswarar temple, nageswaraswamy temple and kasi viswanathar temple are shiva temples in the town revered in the tevaram, a tamil shaiva canonical work of the seventh to eighth century. kumbakonam has one of the few temples dedicated to the god brahma.
sarangapani temple is the largest vaishnava (the sect of the god vishnu) shrine present in kumbakonam. the present structure of the temple having a twelve storey high tower was constructed by nayak kings in the 15th century. it is one of the "divya desams", the 108 temples of vishnu revered by the 12 alvar saint-poets. the ramaswamy temple, which has scenes from the hindu epic ramayana depicted on its walls, was constructed by govinda dikshitar, the minister of successive nayak rulers, achuthappa nayak (1560–1614) and raghunatha nayak (1600–34). he added a commercial corridor between the temple and the older chakrapani temple, which in modern times is called chinna kadai veethi, a commercial street in the town. pilgrims from all parts of india take a holy dip once every 12 years during the mahamaham festival in the mahamaham tank. over 40 lakh pilgrims participated in the festival during the 2016 event which is also known as the southern kumbha mela. govinda dikshitar constructed the sixteen mandapams (shrines) and stone steps around this tank.
kumbakonam also has a number of mathas. the sri sankara matha of kanchipuram was moved to kumbakonam during the reign of pratap singh (1739–63) and remained in kumbakonam until the 1960s. there are also two vellalar mathas in the nearby towns of dharmapuram and thiruppanandal and a raghavendra matha in kumbakonam. there is also a branch of the vaishnava ahobila mutt in kumbakonam.
the thenupuriswarar temple at patteeswaram, the oppiliappan kovil and the swamimalai murugan temple are located in the vicinity of kumbakonam. the airavatesvara temple in darasuram locality of kumbakonam built by rajaraja chola ii (1146–73) during 12th century is a unesco world heritage site, along with the brihadeeswara temple at thanjavur and the gangaikondacholisvaram temple at gangaikonda cholapuram that are collectively referred as the great living chola temples.
