kumbakonam
Administration and Politics[edit]
administration and politics[edit]
municipal corporation[edit]
municipality corporation officials   mayor k.saravanan(congress)   corporation commissioner m.senthil murugan   deputy mayor tamilazhagan(dmk)   elected members   member of legislative assembly g. anbalagan   member of parliament s ramalingam
the kumbakonam municipality was officially constituted in the year 1866. initially, the municipality exercised its jurisdiction over an area of 7.68 km (2.97 sq mi) and its affairs were administered by a town-level committee or municipal committee. later it was constituted special-grade municipality and currently, exercises its authority over an area of 12.58 km (4.86 sq mi) out of the town's total area of 64.02 km (24.72 sq mi). it comprises 48 wards and is the biggest municipality in thanjavur district. the town was upgraded to municipal corporation on 24 august 2021, with administration authority area of 42.9 km (16.6 sq mi).
the functions of the municipality are devolved into six departments: general, engineering, revenue, public health, town planning and the computer wing. all these departments are under the control of a municipal commissioner who is the supreme executive head. the legislative powers are vested in a body of 48 members, one each from each of the 48 wards. the legislative body is headed by an elected chairperson who is assisted by a deputy chairperson.
politics[edit]
kumbakonam is a part of the kumbakonam legislative assembly constituency and elects a member to the tamil nadu legislative assembly once every five years. despite being a hub of militant communism in the 1950s, kumbakonam voted for the indian national congress in the first five state elections held between 1952 and 1977. the dravida munnetra kazhagam won the elections in 1977 and between 1977 and 1989, the seat was alternatively held by the dravida munnetra kazhagam, all india anna dravida munnetra kazhagam or the indian national congress. since 1989, barring an interregnum of five years between 1991 and 1996, the seat has been held by ko. si. mani of the dravida munnetra kazhagam. kumbakonam was a part of the kumbakonam lok sabha constituency from 1952 until 1977, when the constituency was disbanded. the assembly segments in the erstwhile kumbakonam lok sabha constituency were included in the mayiladuthurai lok sabha constituency and have remained so ever since.
law enforcement[edit]
law and order in kumbakonam in maintained by the thanjavur sub division of the tamil nadu police headed by a deputy superintendent of police (dsp). there are four police stations in the town, one of them being an all-women police station. there are special units like prohibition enforcement, district crime, social justice and human rights, district crime records and special branch that operate at the district level police division headed by a superintendent of police (sp). suburban localities are under the jurisdiction of swamimalai, patteswarm, nachiyarkovil, tiruvidamarudhur, thiruneelakudi police stations. recently government has established one police station at cholapuram by reorganizing kumbakonam taluk, swamimali and thirupanandal police station
