kurnool
History[edit]
history[edit]
palaeolithic era[edit]
the ketavaram rock paintings from the paleolithic era and are (18 kilometres from kurnool). also the jurreru valley, katavani kunta and yaganti in kurnool district have some important rock art and paintings in the vicinity, may be dated from 35,000 to 40,000 years ago.
belum caves are geologically and historically important caves in the district.  there are indications that jain and buddhist monks were occupying these caves centuries ago. many buddhists relics were found inside the caves.  these relics are now housed in museum at ananthapur. archaeological survey of india (asi) found remnants of vessels and other artifacts of pre-buddhist era and has dated the remnants of vessels found in the caves to 4500 bc.
vijayanagara era[edit]
little was known about kurnool town before the 11th century. the earliest knowledge of this settlement dates from the 11th century. it has developed as transit place on the southern banks of the river tungabhadra.
ruled by the cholas in 12th century and later taken over by the kakatiya dynasty in 13th century. kurnool developed into a transit point on the southern banks of the tungabhadra river. it eventually fell under the rule of a jaghirdar before becoming a part of the vijayanagar dynasty. king achyuta raya, successor of sri krishnadeva raya constructed the kurnool fort during the 16th century.
mughals rule[edit]
the abyssinian, abdul wahab khan, defeated king gopal raja of the vijayanagar kingdom in the 17th century and went on to rule the land for 16 years until his death.
in 1686, kurnool fell under the influence of the mughals who were ruled by emperor aurangzeb. later on in kurnool's history, it was ruled by the nawabs until the british government took over in 1839.
nawabs[edit]
main article: kurnool state
ghulam rasul khan bahadur (died on 12 july 1840) was the last nawab of kurnool, andhra pradesh. he ruled from 1823 to 1839 until the kingdom was defeated by the east india company. on 12 october 1839, a war broke out between british indian army and the kingdom and continued for six days until the king was detained on 18 october. he was subsequently sent to tiruchirappalli central prison where he died on 12 july 1840.
post independence[edit]
kurnool was the capital of erstwhile andhra state between 1 october 1953 and 31 october 1956. the state was later merged with telugu speaking districts of hyderabad state to form andhra pradesh with hyderabad as the state's capital on 1 november 1956. presently kurnool is in the divided andhra pradesh state.
