latur
Education and research[edit]
education and research[edit]

main article: list of educational institutions in latur district
latur has developed into an educational hub for secondary, higher secondary, and university education. the district is known in maharashtra for its "latur pattern" of study, which involves intensive coaching given in the city. students of junior colleges in latur have a good record in taking competitive engineering and medical entrance exams.
basic and higher education[edit]
public schools (known locally as municipality schools) are run by the lmc, and are affiliated with the msbshse. private schools are run by educational trusts or individuals. they are usually affiliated with either the state board or national education boards, such as the icse or cbse boards.
university education[edit]
due to more than 140 colleges, the city is known as an educational hub in marathwada. many of the students studying in the colleges and the university are from nearby districts. most colleges in latur are affiliated with the nanded university. there is a sub-center of srtmun at latur.
the m. s. bidve engineering college, latur, founded in 1983, is one of the oldest engineering colleges in marathwada. the maharashtra institute of medical science & research latur was founded in 1988 by vishwanath karad.
the border security force training centre, chakur and the disaster management training institute were established in latur in 2005 and 2008, respectively.
dayanand law college was established by the dayanand education society. established medical schools such as the government medical college, manjara ayurvedic college are present in the city.
channabasweshwar pharmacy college is a degree college that provides diploma, degree, and master courses in the pharmacy field. other pharmacy colleges are dayanand college of pharmacy and vilasrao deshmukh college of pharmacy.
vilasrao deshmukh foundation's (vdf) college is a degree college that provides diploma, degree, courses in the engineering and pharmacy field. other pharmacy colleges are dayanand college of pharmacy and vilasrao deshmukh college of pharmacy.
rajarshi shahu college, latur, is a reputed college for undergraduate as well as post graduate education. it provides education in arts, humanities, social sciences, natural sciences, mathematics and commerce.
professional education[edit]
latur is home to a branch of the western india regional council of the institute of chartered accountants of india, along with an exam centre, information technology training lab, reading room, and a library for chartered accountants as well as for students.
medical education is provided by the vilasrao deshmukh government medical college and institute, a public institute of medicine under the maharashtra university of health sciences. maharashtra academy for education and research (maers pune) runs a private medical college known as maharashtra institute of medical sciences and research mimsr and yeshwantrao chavan rural hospital, latur.
engineering and technology education is provided by m.s. bidve college of engineering, puranmal lahoti government polytechnic, and government residential women's polytechnic latur.
