latur
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]

main article: tourism in marathwada
ganj golai
buddha statue at buddha garden temple in latur, maharashtra
virat hanuman temple
religious sites[edit]
siddheshwar & ratneshwar temple is situated about 2 kilometres (2,000 m) from the city. it was built by king tamradwaj and dedicated to lord siddharameshwar swamy siddarama of solapur, who is a gramdaivat ("town deity") of latur town. ganj golai is in the centre of latur city. latur town planner faiyajuddin designed the "ganjgolai chowk". the main building of the golai is a huge two-storey structure which was constructed around the year 1917. in the middle of the circular structure is a temple of the goddess ambabai. there are 19 roads connecting to this golai ("roundabout") and along these roads are separate markets selling various traditional local wares from gold ornaments to footwear and food items from chili to jaggery. shri ashtavinayak mandir is located in shivaji nagar, latur. constructed in 1989, it is a newly built temple famous for its beauty, as there are gardens on both sides of the temple, as well as some artificial fountains in front. a statue of lord shiva, standing 8 to 9 feet tall is situated in the garden. the buddha garden temple has a large statue of buddha. shri virat hanuman mandir is situated at the parivar housing society, close to ausa street, latur. the construction of this sanctuary is quite different from different sanctuaries. this sanctuary is additionally surrounded by an excellent garden. this icon is nearly 28 feet high and is coloured scarlet red (shenderi). shri keshav balaji temple is located in the city of ausa, in latur district. the temple is encompassed by slopes. there are four different sanctuaries: dedicated to lord ganesha, lord shiva, lord vitthal, and goddess rukmini, as well as to keshavanand bapu in similar premises. the sanctuary opens at 6:00 am and closes at 9:00 pm. distinctive sevas are performed for the duration of the day. there is an ordinary prasadam, at 10:00 am and 7:00 pm, for guests. mahaprasadam is held each friday midway between 10:00 am and 6:00 pm. this temple is part of the dharma va sanskar nagari ("religion and sacrament city") project. surat shahawali dargah is situated in patel chowk ram galli, which is part of latur city. this darga was built around 1939 in memory of a muslim holy person, saif ullah shaha sardari, who achieved samadhi there. a yearly 5-day-long fair is held here in june or july.
parks[edit]
nana nani park is also known as vilasrao deshmukh park. it is centrally situated, near the municipal office, and is popular with people due to its relaxing atmosphere. people walk here and spend time with family, children, and friends. there is a space for community meetings at the center of the park. an open theater is also available.
