latur
Trade and industries[edit]
trade and industries[edit]
the city is a major sugarcane and edible oils, soybean, grapes and mango production centre. a fine blend of mango with locally grown mangoes was developed as keshar amba. oil seeds was the major produce of latur region. so for benefit of farmers keshavrao sonavane had established dalda factory which was asia's first oil mill set up on cooperative terms.
till 1990, latur languished as a city, remaining an industrially backward. in 1960, region of marathwada was merged with maharashtra. this was the time when the industrial development of the marathwada region began, propelled through designated backward area benefits. latur got its first midc setup during the tenure of then co-operative minister keshavrao sonavane. it was only when the midc (maharashtra industrial development corporation) began acquiring land and setting up industrial estates that it began to grow. many companies have manufacturing plants in latur, in agriculture processing, edible oils, biotech, consumer durables, plastic processing, and aluminium processing; but the majority are small- and medium-scale agricultural industries, not industrial ones.
latur has the largest trading centre for soybean in india. the green city is inside what is called 'sugar belt' of maharashtra. the district has more than eleven sugar factories, which makes it among the highest sugar-producing districts of india. it also has oil seeds, commodities and fruit market.
latur is also known for high quality grapes and houses many state and privately owned cold storage facilities. a grape wine park spread over 1.42 square kilometres (350 acres) has been established near ausa, 18 km from latur city. a brand new latur food park, spread across 1.2 square kilometres (300 acres) is under construction at additional midc latur. latur is major transport junction to south india.
latur sugar belt[edit]
the latur region is known as the "sugar belt of india". this region houses over eleven large sugar factories. most of the sugar factories of the latur sugar belt work on the co-operative basis. latur got its title "sugar belt of india" largely due to the efforts of its cooperative political leader keshavrao sonawane, who was instrumental in setting up several co-operative institutions in latur, osmanabad, and elsewhere in maharashtra.
midc industrial areas in latur[edit]
latur industrial area additional latur phase i industrial area additional latur phase ii industrial area latur co-operative industrial estate murud taluka co-operative industrial estate chakur co-operative industrial estate udaygiri co-operative industrial estate ausa industrial area ahmedpur industrial area nilanga industrial area udgir industrial area
specialised industrial parks and export zones in latur[edit]
latur food park latur infotech park latur integrated textile park, latur bombay rayon fashions, latur grape yards, ausa
chamber of commerce and industry associations[edit]
latur chamber of commerce, latur latur manufacturers association, midc engineers and architects association, latur latur builders association, latur computers and media dealers association (cmda), latur latur branch of the western india regional council of the institute of chartered accountants of india
