latur
Administration and politics[edit]
administration and politics[edit]
local administration[edit]

main article: latur municipal corporation
office of collector, latur
latur has an earlier municipal council, which was established in 1952. latur municipal corporation (lmc) is the local civil body. it is divided into five zones. the municipal corporation area is about 117.78 square kilometres (45.48 sq mi). it was elevated to the status of municipal corporation by the state government in 2011.
the urban development dept., govt. of maharashtra expressed its desire vide letter dated 30/10/2006 to notify fringe area of latur and appoint cidco as its special planning authority. cidco has submitted its proposal to notify the fringe area measuring approx. 26541.00 ha. inclusive of urbanisable zone of about 16696 ha. govt. has appointed cidco as special planning authority. the notified area covers 40 villages on the fringe of latur municipal corporation. it is envisaged in the project not to acquire 100% land but to adopt minimum land acquisition model for development of infrastructure and growth corridors.
the city is divided in 70 electoral wards called as prabhag and each ward is represented by a corporator (called as nagarsevak) elected by the people from each ward. lmc is responsible for providing basic amenities such as drinking water, drainage facility, road, street lights, healthcare facilities and primary schools. lmc collects its revenue from the urban taxes which are imposed on citizens. the administration is headed by the commissioner of municipal corporation; an i.a.s. officer, assisted by the other officers of different departments.
state and central administration[edit]
keshavrao sonawane, first minister from latur constituency.
latur contributes one seat to the lok sabha. the seat is currently held by sudhakar shringare, mp, of the bjp. it also holds one seat for the assembly - latur indian national congress. in latest constituency arrangements made by election commission of india, latur will contribute one loksabha seat, and two state assembly seats, i.e. latur city and latur rural.
prominent politicians from latur[edit]
vilasrao deshmukh
latur is called the "city of politicians".
keshavrao sonawane was the first minister from latur region who was in the cabinet of maharashtra chief minister yashwantrao chavan and later in the cabinet of vasantrao naik, as cooperatives minister, 1962–1967.
the city is the birthplace of other politicians, such as shivraj patil and diliprao deshmukh.
vilasrao deshmukh was born in babhalgaon village, latur. he served twice as chief minister of maharashtra state, and twice as union cabinet minister.
amidst national political controversy is the death, on 1 december 2014, of judge brijgopal harkishan loya of the central bureau of investigation, who was addressing the case involving amit shah, the national leader of the bharatiya janata party (bjp) and who was cremated at his native village of gategaon.
vikrant vikram gojamgunde is the mayor of latur. he became mayor in 2019. he is the youngest mayor in the state of maharashtra.
