latur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road[edit]
latur is connected by roads with various major cities of maharashtra and other states. road connectivity is excellent, and roads connecting to mumbai, pune, nagpur, nanded, satara, kolhapur, sangli, and aurangabad are being upgraded to four-lane highways. latur city has one national highway running through it, nh 361.
intercity[edit]
the scheme of nationalisation of passenger transport services was started as early as 1932 by the state of hyderabad, which was one of the pioneers in the field of public road transport, first in collaboration with the railways and then as a separate government department. after the reorganisation of the indian states and with an effective date from 1 july 1961, the marathwada state transport was amalgamated with the bombay state road transport corporation into the maharashtra state road transport corporation. the "maharashtra state road transport corporation" (msrtc) and numerous other private bus operators provide a bus service to all parts of the state.
the "maharashtra state road transport corporation" (msrtc) and numerous other private bus operators provide a bus service to all parts of the state. private buses have an established network to connect the city with all the major cities in maharashtra and other states.
intracity transport[edit]
"latur municipal transport" (lmt) is an intra-city bus service which covers almost all parts of the city and also connects to the more distant industrial suburbs. lmt (latur municipal transport) intra-city buses ply throughout the city including the outskirts and connect different parts of the city and adjoining suburbs together.
air[edit]
latur is served by latur airport, which is near chincholiraowadi, 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) northwest of the city. the airport facilities include aircraft fuelling, night landing with navigational aids, aircraft parking, cat vii airport fire fighting and rescue service. a well equipped terminal building has vip lounges, departure and arrival lounges, transit suites and snooze cabins, visitors' waiting area, and a cafeteria.
rail[edit]

main article: latur railway station
the latur-miraj railway (metre gauge) ran for 391 miles (629 km) north-west from latur city to miraj on the south-western section of the great indian peninsula railway and was built between 1929 and 1931. this railway service was closed after the gauge conversion of miraj-latur section from metre to broad gauge. the old and centrally located latur railway station on metre gauge was abandoned thereafter.
the station (code: lur) is located on the latur-miraj section of the solapur railway division of the central railway zone. the manmad-kacheguda broad-gauge railway line, which emanates from the vikarabad-latur-road-parli trunk route at latur road, is an important artery of traffic in latur district. it also serves as a link between aurangabad and hyderabad.
latur has rail connectivity with bangalore, mumbai, pune, nagpur, manmad, aurangabad, nanded, parbhani, parli vaijnath, osmanabad, mudkhed, adilabad, basar, nizamabad, nashik and kacheguda.
the miraj–latur railway track is being electrified. work is expected to be completed around 2024.
latur has been blessed with the new marathwada railway coach factory being set up at latur. located near the harangul railway station, the factory was set up by the indian raillways' undertaking rail vikas nigam limited rvnl in 2018. first coach shell was produced on 25 december 2020, on good governance day. the factory has been designed with an initial capacity of 250 memu/emu/lhb coaches per annum.
a five km (3.1 mi) long railway line has also been provided from factory to new electronically interlocked harangul station, which earlier used to be a halt station only.
