loni-ghaziabad
Connectivity and transport[edit]
connectivity and transport[edit]
loni can be reached by road, rail, and air. by road, loni is well-connected to delhi, noida, hapur, modinagar, bulandshahr, meerut, saharanpur, haridwar, etc.  many people commute to delhi, noida, and greater noida every day for work. the nearest airport is hindon airport, which is located in ghaziabad.
road[edit]
loni has a moderate road network connecting to the delhi-saharanpur road, with bus service provided by uttar pradesh state road transport corporation (upsrtc) buses. the bus stand of the upsrtc is located near loni crossing (delhi). earlier, the delhi transport corporation (dtc) also provided similar bus service but currently such service is not available in loni. indira puri was the location of the dtc bus terminal for delhi buses, where dtc routes 2 and 263 used to be available. loni is 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) from the inter state bus terminals (isbt) of kashmiri gate and anand vihar, and 18 kilometres (11 mi) from ghaziabad. a new bus terminal for private bus operators is near the advanced learning telecom (alt) training center, raj nagar, which is called the alt bus stand. the most common system of transportation is shared autos, which run between shahdara metro station, pabi (near tronica city), loni, tiraha, and indrapuri. two bus routes go to the uttar pradesh (up) border, and to the shahdara and seelampur metro stations. loni depot is a up bus terminal for upsrtc buses, where buses are available to shamli, baraut, baghpat, saharanpur, gramin sewa rampark ext., khajuri chowk, by pusta road, pavi tiraha to khajuri, etc.
rail[edit]
loni is also connected via railway. its main stations are the noli railway station (noli), behta hazipur halt (bhhz), nursratabad kharkhari (ntg), and gotra halt (gtra). noli, which is within the northern railway zone of indian railways, is close to old delhi and ghaziabad railway stations, and connects loni to delhi through shahdara on the shamli saharanpur route). noli handles over 26 trains and serves about 12,000 passengers every day. there are four intercity trains that start from or pass through noli. a warehouse of the food corporation of india (fci) at the station is now used as a container depot.
delhi metro[edit]
loni is now connected with metro services through the pink line. the dmrc has a station within loni, at shiv vihar, which is on a 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) extension of the yamuna vihar line to shiv vihar, in the third phase of expansion of the metro network under the pink line with metro feeder bus service. the shiv vihar station is serving large part of loni which was previously dependent on shared auto. shiv vihar station is catering to a large number of commuters from loni, with its population of at least 500,000 people. it is also close to delhi, just 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) from the shahdara and seelampur metro stations.
air[edit]
hindon airport loni is 11 kilometres (6.8 mi) from hindon airport, which is located in ghaziabad, india
loni is 35 kilometres (22 mi) from indira gandhi international airport, located at palam, which is the primary international airport of the national capital region of delhi.  with the commencement of operations at the new terminal 3, indira gandhi international airport has become india's and south asia's largest aviation hub, with a current capacity of more than 46 million passengers a year.
