lucknow
Economy
economy

main article: economy of lucknow
tcs awadh park, tata consultancy services' regional office at lucknow.
the major industries in the lucknow urban agglomeration include aeronautics, automotive, machine tools, distillery chemicals, furniture and chikan embroidery. lucknow is among the top cities of india by gdp. it is a centre for research and development as home to the r&d centres of the national milk grid of the national dairy development board, the central institute of medical and aromatic plants, the national handloom development corporation and u.p. export corporation. lucknow is ranked sixth in a list of the ten fastest growing job-creating cities in india according to a study conducted by assocham placement pattern, lucknow's economy was formerly based on the tertiary sector and the majority of the workforce were employed as government servants. large-scale industrial establishments are few compared to other northern indian state capitals like new delhi. the economy is growing with contributions from the fields of it, manufacturing and processing and medical/biotechnology. business-promoting institutions such as the cii have set up their service centres in the city. major export items are marbled products, handicrafts, art pieces, gems, jewellery, textiles, electronics, software products, computers, hardware products, apparel, brass products, silk, leather goods, glass items and chemicals. lucknow has promoted public-private partnerships in sectors such as electricity supply, roads, expressways, and educational ventures.
multiple software and it companies are present in the city. tata consultancy services, hcl technologies are present in the city. it companies are located in gomtinagar. there are many local open source technology companies. the city is also home to a number of important national and state level headquarters for companies including sony corporation and reliance retail. the handicrafts sector  accounts for 60 percent of total exports from the state.
companies such as hindustan aeronautics limited, karam, tata marcopolo,  exide industries, tata motors set up their plants in lucknow. lucknow is an emerging automobile hub. tata motors have a plant primarily for light commercial vehicles. it was set up in 1992 and has a production capacity of 640 vehicles per day. additionally there is a plant of tata marcopolo in the city.
to promote the textile industry in the city, the indian government has allocated rs. 2 billion (2000 million rupees) to set up a textile business cluster in the city.  a sprawling 40 hectares (0.40 km; 100 acres) it city costing 15 billion rupees is planned by the state government at the chak ganjaria farms site on the road to sultanpur and they have already approved special economic zone status for the project, which is expected to create thousands of job opportunities in the state. a defense industrial corridor is also coming in the city.
