lucknow
Media
media
lucknow has had an influence on the hindi film industry as the birthplace of poet, dialogue writer and script writer k. p. saxena, suresh chandra shukla born 10 february 1954 along with veteran bollywood and bengali film actor pahari sanyal, who came from the city's well known sanyal family. several movies have used lucknow as their backdrop including shashi kapoor's junoon, muzaffar ali's umrao jaan and gaman, satyajit ray's shatranj ke khiladi. ismail merchant's shakespeare wallah, paa and shailendra pandey's jd. in the movie gadar: ek prem katha lucknow was used to depict pakistan, with locations including lal pul, the taj hotel and the rumi darwaza used in tanu weds manu. some parts of ladies vs ricky bahl, bullett raja, ishaqzaade, ya rab and dabangg 2 were shot in lucknow or at other sites nearby. a major section of the bollywood movie, daawat-e-ishq starring aditya roy kapur and parineeti chopra was shot in the city as was baawre, an indian tv drama, airing on the life ok channel. the government has announced to develop two film cities in lucknow. here are some newspaper companies working and give online news services to the news readers including amar ujala, dainik jagran, hindustan times, the times of india and dainik bhaskar.
the pioneer newspaper, headquartered in lucknow and started in 1865, is the second-oldest english-language newspaper in india still in production. the country's first prime minister jawaharlal nehru founded the national herald in the city prior to world war ii with manikonda chalapathi rau as its editor.
one of the earliest all india radio stations has been operational in lucknow since 1938.
fm radio transmission started in lucknow in 2000. the city has the following fm radio stations:
radio city 91.1 mhz red fm 93.5 mhz radio mirchi 98.3 mhz air fm rainbow 100.7 mhz fever 104 fm 104.0 mhz gyan vani 105.6 mhz (educational) air fm vividh bharti 101.6 mhz cms fm 90.4 mhz (educational) mirchi love 107.2 fm bbdu fm 90.8 mhz (of babu banarsi das university)
"my lucknow my pride" is a mobile app launched by the district administration of lucknow circa december 2015 in efforts to preserve "the cultural heritage of lucknow" and to encourage tourism.
