lucknow
Central government offices
central government offices
vidhan bavan at vs marg, seat of both the houses of uttar pradesh legislature.
since 1 may 1963, lucknow has been the headquarters of the central command of the indian army, before which it was the headquarters of eastern command.
lucknow also houses a branch office of national investigation agency which is responsible for combating terrorist activities in india. it oversees five states of bihar, madhya pradesh, uttarakhand, jharkhand and chhattisgarh for naxal and terrorist activities.
the commission of railway safety of india, under the ministry of civil aviation, has its head office in the northeast railway compound in lucknow.
infrastructure
the development of infrastructure in the city is overseen by lucknow development authority (lda), which comes under the housing department of uttar pradesh government. the divisional commissioner of lucknow acts as the ex-officio chairman of lda, whereas a vice-chairman, a government-appointed ias officer, looks after the daily matters of the authority. the current vice-chairman of the lucknow development authority is ias akshay tripathi. lda prepared the lucknow master plan 2031.
politics
as the seat of the government of uttar pradesh, lucknow is the site of the uttar pradesh vidhan sabha, a bench of the allahabad high court and numerous government departments and agencies. rajnath singh, the union defense minister, from bharatiya janata party is the member of parliament from lucknow lok sabha constituency. kaushal kishore is the member of parliament from mohanlalganj (lok sabha constituency), the second lok sabha constituency in lucknow.  apart from the lok sabha constituency, there are nine vidhan sabha constituencies within lucknow city:
vidhan sabha constituencies in lucknow   constituency  mla  political party   lucknow west  armaan khan  samajwadi party   lucknow north  dr. neeraj bora  bharatiya janata party   lucknow east  asutosh tandon (gopal ji)  bharatiya janata party   lucknow central  ravidas mehotra  samajwadi party   lucknow cantt  brajesh pathak  bharatiya janata party   malihabad  jai devi  bharatiya janata party   bakhshi ka talab  yogesh shukla  bharatiya janata party   sarojni nagar  rajeshwar singh  bharatiya janata party   mohanlal ganj  amresh kumar  bharatiya janata party
