lucknow
Culture
culture

see also: ganga-jamuni tehzeeb
brijesh pathak, minister of law & justice and additional energy resources in uttar pradesh, inaugurating the bada mangal festivities at upneda office in vibhuti khand (may 2017)
free food being distributed on a bada mangal (may 2017). bada mangal is a ritual specific only to lucknow.
in common with other metropolitan cities across india, lucknow is multicultural and multilingual. many of the cultural traits and customs peculiar to lucknow have become living legends today. the city's contemporary culture is the result of the amalgamation of the hindu and muslim rulers who ruled the city simultaneously. the credit for this goes to the secular and syncretic traditions of the nawabs of awadh, who took a keen interest in every walk of life and encouraged these traditions to attain a rare degree of sophistication. modern-day lucknowites are known for their polite and polished way of speaking which is noticed by visitors. the residents of lucknow call themselves lucknowites or lakhnavi. it also represents the melting pot of globalisation where the legacy of nawab's culture continues to be reflected in the traditional vocabulary of the hindi language of the city along with better avenues for modernisation present here.
traditional outfit

main article: gharara
lucknow is known for its ghararas. it is a traditional women's outfit that originated from the nawabs of awadh. it is a pair of loose trousers with pleats below the knee worn with a kurta (shirt) and a dupatta (veil). it is embroidered with zari and zardozi along with gota (decorative lace on the knee area). this dress is made from over 24 metres (26 yd) of fabric, mostly silk, brocade and kamkhwab.
language and poetry
although uttar pradesh's primary official language is hindi, the most commonly spoken language is colloquial hindustani. indian english is also well understood and is widely used for business and administrative purposes, as a result of india's british heritage and commonwealth tradition, as well as globalisation. the urdu language is also a part of lucknowi culture and heritage. it is mostly used by wealthier families, the remaining members of the royal family as well as in urdu poetry and on public signs. the government has taken many innovative steps to promote urdu. awadhi, a dialect of the hindi dialect continuum, is the native dialect of lucknow and has played an important role in lucknow's history and is still used in the city's rural areas and by the urban population on the streets.
historically, lucknow was considered one of the great centres of muslim culture. two poets, mir babar ali anis and mirza dabeer, became legendary exponents of a unique genre of muslim elegiacal poetry called marsiya centred on imam husain's supreme sacrifice in the battle of karbala, which is commemorated during the annual observance of muharram.
the revolutionary ram prasad bismil, who was hanged by the british at gorakhpur jail, was largely influenced by the culture of lucknow and remembered its name in his poetry. surrounding towns such as kakori, daryabad, fatehpur, barabanki, rudauli, and malihabad produced many eminent urdu poets and litterateurs including mohsin kakorvi, majaz, khumar barabankvi and josh malihabadi.
cuisine

main articles: awadhi cuisine, mughlai cuisine, and cuisine of uttar pradesh
tunday's gelawati kababs, lucknow's speciality
the awadh region has its own distinct nawabi-style cuisine. since ages, the bawarchis (chefs) and rakabdars (royal chefs) have developed great finesse in cooking and presentation of food, under royal patronage. this gave rise to the art of cooking over a slow fire (or dum style cooking), which has become synonymous with "awadhi" cuisine. these bawarchis added elaborately prepared dishes like kababs, kormas, kaliya, nahari-kulchas, zarda, sheermal, roomali rotis and warqi parathas to the traditional "awadhi" dastarkhwaan (feast of dishes). the best-known dishes of this area consist of biryanis, kebabs and breads. kebabs are served in a variety of styles; kakori, galawati, shami, boti, patili-ke, ghutwa and seekh are among the available varieties. tunde ke kabab restaurants are popular for a type of soft kebab developed by a one-armed chef (hence the name tunday) for a nawab who had lost his teeth. the reputation of lucknow's kebabs is not limited to the local population and the dish attracts people from other cities as well as other countries.
lucknow is also known for its chaats, street food, kulfi, paan and sweets. nahari, a dish prepared using mutton, is popular among non-vegetarians. sheermal is a type of sweet bread (paratha) prepared in lucknow. makkhan-malai is another sweet delicacy of lucknow made and sold only during winters. some restaurants in the city are around a century old; there are also many high-end restaurants, bakeries, lounges and pubs which cater to the affluent class and foreign travellers.
festivals
indian festivals such as christmas, diwali, durga puja, eid, holi, raksha bandhan and vijayadashami are celebrated with great pomp and show in the city. some of the other festivals or processions are as follows:
lucknow mahotsav
lucknow festival is organised every year to showcase uttar pradesh art and culture and to promote tourism. with 1975–76 designated south asian tourism year, lucknow took the opportunity to promote the city's art, culture and tourism to national and international tourists. the first lucknow festival was staged as a part of this promotion and ever since, with some exceptions, lucknow mahotsava has taken place annually.
lucknow literature festival
this is an annual literature festival held in the month of november every year since 2013. lucknow litfest is india's second-largest literature festival featuring some of the greatest writers and thinkers from across the globe.
muharram
main article: azadari in lucknow lucknow is known as a seat of shia islam and the epitome of shia culture in india. muslims observe muharram, the first month of the islamic calendar and on ashura (the tenth day of the month) mourn the memory of imam husain, grandson of the islamic prophet, muhammad. muharram processions in lucknow have a special significance and began during the reign of the awadh nawabs.
processions such as shahi zarih, jaloos-e-mehndi, alam-e-ashura and chup tazia had special significance by the shia community and were affected with great religious zeal and fervour until 1977 the government of uttar pradesh banned public azadari processions. for the following twenty years, processions and gatherings took place in private or community spaces including talkatora karbala, bara imambara (imambara asifi), chota imambara (imambara husainabad), dargah hazrat abbas, shah najaf and imambara ghufran ma'ab. the ban was partially lifted in 1997 and shias were successful in taking out the first azadari procession in january 1998 on the 21st of ramadan, the muslim fasting month. the shias are authorised to stage nine processions out of the nine hundred that are listed in the register of the shias.
deva mela
dewasharif
deva mela is celebrated during the anniversary of sufi saint haji waris ali shah at dewa, india which is 26 k.m from lucknow city. sufi songs (qawwalis) are recited at the dargah. devotees also carry sheets/chadars to the shrines.
chup tazia
the procession originated in lucknow before spreading to other parts of south asia. dating back to the era of the nawabs, it was started by nawab ahmed ali khan shaukat yar jung a descendant of bahu begum. it has become one of the most important azadari processions in lucknow and one of the nine permitted by the government. this last mourning procession takes place on the morning of the 8th of rabi' al-awwal, the third muslim month and includes alam (flags), zari and a ta'zieh (an imitation of the mausoleums in karbala). it originates at the imambara nazim saheb in victoria street then moves in complete silence through patanala until it terminates at the karbala kazmain, where the colossal black ta'zieh is buried.
bada mangal festival is celebrated in may as a birthday of the ancient hanuman temple known as purana mandir. during this festival, fairs are conducted by the local public in the whole city. bhandara is organised by local people almost in all streets across the city and serves free food to all the passersby irrespective of religion. many of the muslim community also set up these bhandara. it is celebrated in the name of hindu god lord hanuman and reflects the ganga jamuni tehzeeb.
dance, drama and music
a dancer posing during a kathak dance sequence. the dance has its origins in northern india and especially lucknow.
the classical indian dance form kathak originated from lucknow. wajid ali shah, the last nawab of awadh, was a great patron and a passionate champion of kathak. lachhu maharaj, acchchan maharaj, shambhu maharaj and birju maharaj have kept this tradition alive.
lucknow is also the home city of the eminent ghazal singer begum akhtar. a pioneer of the style, "ae mohabbat tere anjaam pe rona aaya" is one of her best known musical renditions. bhatkande music institute university at lucknow is named after the musician vishnu narayan bhatkhande bhartendu academy of dramatic arts (bna), also known as bhartendu natya academy, is a theatre-training institute situated at gomti nagar. it is a deemed university and an autonomous organisation under the ministry of culture, government of uttar pradesh. it was set up in 1975 by the sangeet natak akademy (government of uttar pradesh), and became an independent drama school in 1977. apart from government institutes, there are many private theatre groups including ipta, theatre arts workshop (taw), darpan, manchkriti and the largest youth theatre group, josh. this is a group for young people to experience theatre activities, workshops and training.
lucknow is also the birthplace of musicians including naushad, talat mahmood, anup jalota and baba sehgal as well as british pop celebrity sir cliff richard.
lucknow chikan
lucknow is known for embroidery works including chikankari, zari, zardozi, kamdani and gota making (gold lace weaving).
chikankari is an embroidery work well known all over india. this 400-year-old art in its present form was developed in lucknow and it remains the only location where the skill is practised today. chikankari constitutes 'shadow work' and is a delicate and artistic hand embroidery done using white thread on fine white cotton cloth such as fine muslin or chiffon. yellowish muga silk is sometimes used in addition to the white thread. the work is done on caps, kurtas, saris, scarfs, and other vestments. the chikan industry, almost unknown under the nawabs, has not only survived but has flourished. about 2,500 entrepreneurs have engaged in manufacturing chikan for sale in local, national and international markets with lucknow the largest exporter of chikan embroidered garments.
as a sign of recognition, in december 2008, the indian geographical indication registry (gir) accorded geographical indication (gi) status for chikankari, recognising lucknow as the exclusive hub for its manufacture.
quality of life
lucknow was ranked "india's second happiest city" in a survey conducted by imrb international and lg corporation, after only chandigarh. it fared better than other metropolitan cities in india including new delhi, bangalore and chennai. lucknow was found to be better than other cities in areas such as food, transit and overall citizen satisfaction.
