lucknow
Education
education

see also: list of educational institutions in lucknow
lucknow is home to a number of prominent educational and research organisations including indian institute of management lucknow (iim-l), indian institute of information technology, lucknow (iiit-l), central drug research institute (cdri), indian institute of toxicology research, national botanical research institute (nbri), institute of engineering and technology (iet lko), dr. ram manohar lohia national law university (rmnlu), institute of hotel management, lucknow (ihm), sanjay gandhi postgraduate institute of medical sciences (sgpgi), dr. ram manohar lohia institute of medical sciences and king george's medical university (kgmu). the national p. g. college (npgc), affiliated to the university of lucknow, was ranked as the second-best college imparting formal education in the country by the national assessment and accreditation council in 2014.
educational institutions in the city include seven universities including the university of lucknow, a babasaheb bhimrao ambedkar university, a technical university (uttar pradesh technical university), a law university (rmlnlu), an islamic university (dunu) and many polytechnics, engineering institutes and industrial-training institutes. other research organisations in the state include the central institute of medicinal and aromatic plants, central food technological research institute, and the central glass and ceramic research institute.
some of uttar pradesh's major schools are located in lucknow including delhi public school having its branches in eldeco, indiranagar. lucknow international public school, city montessori school, colvin taluqdars' college, centennial higher secondary school, st. francis' college, loreto convent lucknow, st. mary's convent inter college, kendriya vidyalaya, lucknow public school, stella maris inter college, seth m.r. jaipuria school, cathedral school, mary gardiner's convent school, modern school, amity international school, st. agnes, army public school, mount carmel college, study hall, christ church college, rani laxmi bai school and central academy.
city montessori school, with over 20 branches spread throughout the city, is the only school in the world to have been awarded a unesco prize for peace education. cms also holds a guinness world record for being the largest school in the world, with over 40,000 pupils. the school consistently ranks among the top schools of india.
la martiniere lucknow, founded in 1845, is the only school in the world to have been awarded a battle honour. it is one of the oldest schools in india, often ranked among the top ten schools in the country. lucknow also has a sports college named guru gobind singh sports college.
indian institute of management lucknow       institute of engineering and technology, lucknow       indian institute of information technology, lucknow       la martiniere college       university of lucknow       central drug research institute       amity university lucknow campus, also known as mango orchard campus       bbd groups of colleges campus in lucknow       bbd university building in bbd campus in lucknow
