lucknow
Administration
administration
administration
general administration
lucknow division which consists of six districts, and is headed by the divisional commissioner of lucknow, who is an ias officer of high seniority, the commissioner is the head of local government institutions (including municipal corporations) in the division, is in charge of infrastructure development in his division, and is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the division. the district magistrate of lucknow reports to the divisional commissioner. the current commissioner is mukesh meshram.
lucknow district administration is headed by the district magistrate of lucknow, who is an ias officer. the dm is in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government and oversees the elections held in the city. the district has five tehsils, viz. sadar, mohanlalganj, bakshi ka talab, malihabad and sarojini nagar, each headed by a sub-divisional magistrate. the current dm is abhishek prakash. the district magistrate is assisted by a chief development officer (cdo), eight additional district magistrates (adm) (finance/revenue, east, west trans-gomti, executive, land acquisition-i, land acquisition-ii, civil supply), one city magistrate (cm) and seven additional city magistrates (acm).
civic administration
the lucknow municipal corporation oversees civic activities in the city. the city's first municipal body dates from 1862 when the municipal board was established. the first indian mayor, syed nabiullah, was elected in 1917 after the enforcement of the up municipalities act, 1916. in 1948, the uttar pradesh government changed the system from an electoral one to an administrator-run one and bhairav datt sanwal became the administrator. in 1959, the up municipalities act, 1916 was replaced with uttar pradesh municipal corporation act, 1959 and lucknow municipal corporation was established in 1960 with raj kumar shrivastava becoming the mayor.
the head of the corporation is the mayor, but the executive and administration of the corporation are the responsibility of the municipal commissioner, who is an uttar pradesh government-appointed indian administrative services (ias) officer of high seniority. the last municipal election took place in 2017 when sanyukta bhatia from bharatiya janata party became the first female mayor of lucknow. bharatiya janata party won 57 councillor seats, samajwadi party won 31 seats, independent candidates won 14 seats, and indian national congress won 8 seats. ajay kumar dwivedi, an ias officer, is the present municipal commissioner since 17 august 2020. the uttar pradesh municipal corporation act, 1959 gives provisions for the establishment of ward committees, but they have not been formed yet.
the sources for revenue generation for lucknow municipal corporation include property tax, user charges for swm, penalties, rent from municipal properties, income from water storage, water transmission, drainage and sanitation, grants, and charges for services such as birth and death certificates. the municipal corporation has the following administrative departments: health department, house tax department, engineering department, park department, advertisement department, accounting department, property department. there is also an executive committee (कार्यकारिणी समिति) made up of 12 elected councillors from different political parties, who decide on policy matters of the corporation.
police administration

see also: lucknow city police
the police commissionerate system was introduced in lucknow on 14 january 2020. the district police is headed by a commissioner of police (cp), who is an ips officer of adgp rank and is assisted by two joint commissioners of police (ig rank), and five deputy commissioners of police (sp rank). lucknow is divided into five zones, each headed by a deputy commissioner of police. of the two joint commissioners, one looks after law and order, the other crime. the current police commissioner of lucknow city is ips sb shirodkar.
the district police observes the citizenry through high-technology control rooms and all important streets and intersections are under surveillance with the help of cctvs and drone cameras. crowd-control is carried out with the help of pepper-spraying drones. there are more than 10,000 cctv cameras deployed by the lucknow police department across the city roads and trijunctions, making lucknow the first city in the country to do so.
the lucknow modern police control room (abbreviated as mcr) is india's biggest 'dial 112' service centre with 300 communication officers to receive distress calls from all over the state and 200 dispatch officers to rush for police help. it is billed as the india's most hi-tech police control room. lucknow is also the center for 1090 women power line, a call center based service directed at dealing with eve-teasing. an integrated 'dial 112' control room building is also there which is having the world's biggest modern police emergency response system (pers).
the lucknow fire brigade department is headed by the chief fire officer, who is subordinate to the district magistrate and is assisted by a deputy chief fire officer and divisional officers.
