lucknow
Architecture
architecture

main article: architecture of lucknow
skyline of lucknow as seen from gomti nagar
lucknow's buildings show different styles of architecture with the many iconic buildings built during the british and mughal era. more than half of these buildings lie in the old part of the city. the uttar pradesh tourism department organises a "heritage walk" for tourists covering the popular monuments. among the extant architecture, there are religious buildings such as imambaras, mosques, and other islamic shrines as well as secular structures such as enclosed gardens, baradaris, and palace complexes.
ghanta ghar, the tallest clock tower in india
bara imambara in hussainabad is a colossal edifice built in 1784 by the then nawab of lucknow, asaf-ud-daula. it was originally built to provide assistance to people affected by the deadly famine, which struck the whole of uttar pradesh in the same year. it is the largest hall in asia without any external support from wood, iron or stone beams. the monument required approximately 22,000 labourers during construction.
the 18 m (60 feet) tall rumi darwaza, built by nawab asaf-ud-daula (r. 1775–1797) in 1784, served as the entrance to the city of lucknow. it is also known as the turkish gateway, as it was erroneously thought to be identical to the gateway at constantinople. the edifice provides the west entrance to the great imambara and is embellished with lavish decorations.
various architectural styles can be seen in the historical areas of lucknow. the university of lucknow shows a huge inspiration from the european style while indo-saracenic revival architecture is prominently present in the uttar pradesh vidhan sabha building and charbagh railway station. dilkusha kothi is the remains of a palace constructed by the british resident major gore ouseley around 1800 and showcases english baroque architecture. it served as a hunting lodge for the nawab of awadhs and as a summer resort.
the chattar manzil, which served as the palace for the rulers of awadh and their wives is topped by an umbrella-like dome and so named on account of chattar being the hindi word for "umbrella". opposite chattar manzil stands the 'lal baradari' built by nawab saadat ali khan i between 1789 and 1814. it functioned as a throne room at coronations for the royal courts. the building is now used as a museum and contains delicately executed portraits of men who played major roles in the administration of the kingdom of oudh.
multi-storey apartments
another example of mixed architectural styles is la martiniere college, which shows a fusion of indian and european ideas. it was built by major-general claude martin who was born in lyon and died in lucknow on 13 september 1800. originally named "constantia", the ceilings of the building are domed with no wooden beams used for construction. glimpses of gothic architecture can also be seen in the college building.
lucknow's asafi imambara exhibits vaulted halls as its architectural speciality. the bara imambara, chhota imambara and rumi darwaza stand in testament to the city's nawabi mixture of mughlai and turkish styles of architecture while la martiniere college bears witness to the indo-european style. even the new buildings are fashioned using characteristic domes and pillars, and at night these illuminated monuments become the city's main attractions.
around hazratganj, the city's central shopping area, there is a fusion of old and modern architecture. it has a multi-level parking lot in place of an old and dilapidated police station making way for extending the corridors into pebbled pathways, adorned with piazzas, green areas and wrought-iron and cast-iron lamp-posts, reminiscent of the victorian era, flank both sides of the street.
