lucknow
Transport
transport
roads
the roads of lucknow (gomti nagar in picture)
agra–lucknow expressway
purvanchal expressway
two major indian national highways have their intersection at lucknow's hazratganj intersection: nh-24 to delhi, nh-30 to allahabad via raebareli, nh-27 to kanpur and porbandar via jhansi and silchar via gorakhpur. multiple modes of public transport are available such as metro rail, taxis, city buses, cycle rickshaws, auto rickshaws and compressed natural gas (cng) low-floor buses with and without air-conditioning. cng was introduced as an auto fuel to keep air pollution under control. radio taxis are operated by several major companies like ola and uber.
bus
city buses

see also: lucknow city transport services limited
buses of lucknow mahanagar parivahan sewa
lucknow city's bus service is operated by lucknow city transport services limited (lctsl), a public sector passenger road transport corporation headquartered in triloki nath margh. it has 260 buses operating in the city. there are around 35 routes in the city. terminals for city buses are located in gudamba, viraj khand, alambagh, scooter india, institute of engineering and technology, babu banarasi das university, safedabad, pasi qila, charbagh, andhe ki chowki, jankipuram, gomti nagar railway station, budheshwar intersection, faizabad road and qaiserbagh. there are four bus depots in gomti nagar, charbagh, amausi, and dubagga.
inter-state buses

see also: kanpur lucknow roadways service and lucknow upnagariya parivahan sewa

the major dr. bhimrao ambedkar inter-state bus terminal (isbt) in alambagh provides the main inter and intrastate bus lines in lucknow. located on national highway 25, it provides adequate services to ongoing and incoming customers. there is a smaller bus station at qaiserbagh. the bus terminal formally operated at charbagh, in front of the main railway station, has now been re-established as a city bus depot. this decision was taken by the state government and upsrtc to decongest traffic in the railway station area. kanpur lucknow roadways service is a key service for daily commuters who travel back and forth to the city for business and educational purposes. air conditioned "royal cruiser" buses manufactured by volvo are operated by upsrtc for inter state bus services. main cities served by the upsrtc intrastate bus service are allahabad, varanasi, jaipur, jhansi, agra, delhi, gorakhpur. the cities outside uttar pradesh that are covered by inter-state bus services are jaipur, new delhi, kota, singrauli, faridabad, gurgaon, dausa, ajmer, dehradun, and haridwar.
railways

see also: lucknow charbagh railway station, lucknow–kanpur suburban railway, and barabanki-lucknow suburban railway
lucknow charbagh railway station
lucknow junction railway station
lucknow is served by several railway stations in different parts of the city. the main long-distance railway station is lucknow railway station located at charbagh. it has an imposing structure built in 1923 and acts as the divisional headquarters of the northern railway division. its neighbouring and second major long-distance railway station is lucknow junction railway station operated by the north eastern railway. the city is an important junction with links to all major cities of the state and country such as new delhi, mumbai, hyderabad, kolkata, chandigarh, nashik, amritsar, jammu, chennai, bangalore, ahmedabad, pune, indore, bhopal, jhansi, jabalpur, jaipur, raipur and siwan. the city has a total of fourteen railway stations. earlier the meter-gauge services originated at aishbagh and connected to lucknow city, daliganj and mohibullapur. now all the stations have been converted to broad gauge. all stations lie within the city limits and are well interconnected by bus services and other public road transport. suburban stations include bakshi ka talab and kakori. the lucknow–kanpur suburban railway was started in 1867 to cater for the needs of commuters travelling between lucknow and kanpur. trains running on this service also stop at numerous stations at different locations in the city forming a suburban rail network.
air transport

see also: chaudhary charan singh international airport and lucknow air force station
terminal-2, ccs international airport
terminal-2, ccs international airport
direct air connections are available in lucknow to new delhi, patna, kolkata, mumbai, bangalore, ahmedabad, hyderabad, chennai, guwahati, jaipur, raipur and other major cities via chaudhary charan singh international airport. the airport has been ranked the second-best in the world in the small airport category. the airport is suitable for all-weather operations and provides parking facilities for up to 14 aircraft. at present air india, air india express, goair, indigo, saudi airlines, flydubai, oman air and vistara operate domestic and international flights to and from lucknow. covering 480 hectares (4.80 km; 1,187 acres), with terminal 1 for international flights and terminal 2 for domestic flights, the airport can handle boeing 767 to boeing 747-400 aircraft allowing significant passenger and cargo traffic. international destinations include dubai, muscat, sharjah, riyadh, bangkok, dammam and jeddah.
the planned expansion of the airport will allow airbus a380 jumbo jets to land at the airport. the nagarjuna construction company (ncc) has started the construction of the new terminal at lucknow airport which is expected to be completed by december 2021 to meet the growing demand. there is also a plan for runway expansion. it is the tenth busiest airport in india, the busiest in uttar pradesh, and the second-busiest in northern india.
in february 2019, the airport was privatised and leased to adani group for 50 years at the highest bid of ₹171 per passenger.
metro

see also: lucknow metro
lucknow metro
lucknow metro coach
lucknow metro is a rapid transit system which started its operations from 6 september 2017. lucknow metro system is the most-quickly built metro system in the world and most economical high-speed rapid transit system project in india. the commencement of civil works started on 27 september 2014.
in february, chief minister akhilesh yadav approved to set up of a metro rail system for the state capital. it is divided into two corridors the north-south corridor connecting munshipulia to ccs international airport and the east-west corridor connecting charbagh railway station to vasant kunj. this will be the most expensive public transport system in the state but will provide a rapid means of mass transport to decongest traffic on city roads. construction of the first phase will be complete by march 2017. the completion of metro rail project is the primary object of uttar pradesh government currently headed by the chief minister yogi adityanath
on 5 september 2017, home minister rajnath singh and cm yogi adityanath showed green flag to the lucknow metro.
cycling
lucknow is among the most bicycle-friendly cities in uttar pradesh. bike-friendly tracks have been established near the chief minister's residence in the city. the four-and-a-half-kilometre (2.8 mi) track encompasses la-martiniere college road next to a golf club on kalidas marg, where the chief minister resides, and vikramaditya marg, which houses the office of the ruling party. the dedicated four-metre (13 ft) lane for cyclists is separate from the footpath and the main road. with amsterdam as the inspiration, new cycle tracks are to be constructed in the city to make it more cycle-friendly, with facilities like bike rental also in the works. in the year 2015, lucknow also hosted a national level cycling event called 'the lucknow cyclothon' in which professional and amateur cyclists took part. an under-construction cycle track network by the government of uttar pradesh is set to make lucknow the city with india's biggest cycle network.
