lucknow
Sports
sports
brsabv ekana cricket stadium
k. d. singh babu stadium, lucknow
dr. akhilesh das gupta stadium
cricket, association football, badminton, golf, and hockey are among the most popular sports in the city.
the main sports hub is the k. d. singh babu stadium, which also has a swimming pool and indoor games complex. there are plans to develop kdsb stadium along the lines of ekana stadium. kdsb stadium needs rs 2 billion in funds to redesign and upgrade as per international standards. the other stadiums are dhyan chand astroturf stadium, mohammed shahid synthetic hockey stadium, dr. akhilesh das gupta stadium at northern india engineering college, babu banarsi das up badminton academy, charbagh, mahanagar, chowk and the sports college near the integral university.
in september 2017, ekana international cricket stadium was opened to the public as it hosted 2017–18 duleep trophy. on 6 november 2018 ekana international cricket stadium hosted its first t20 international match between indian national cricket team and west indies cricket team.
it is the third largest cricket stadium in india by capacity after kolkata's eden gardens and ahmedabad's narendra modi stadium. for decades lucknow hosted the sheesh mahal cricket tournament.
lucknow is the headquarters for the badminton association of india. located in gomti nagar, it was formed in 1934 and has been holding national-level tournaments in india since 1936.  syed modi grand prix is an international badminton competition held here. junior-level badminton players receive their training in lucknow after which they are sent to bangalore.
the lucknow race course in lucknow cantonment is spread over 28.42 hectares (0.2842 km; 70.22 acres); the course's 3.2 kilometres (2.0 mi)-long race track is the longest in india.
the lucknow golf club is on the sprawling greens of la martinière college.
the city has produced several national and world-class sporting personalities. lucknow sports hostel has produced international-level cricketers mohammad kaif, piyush chawla, suresh raina, gyanendra pandey, praveen kumar and r. p. singh. other notable sports personalities include hockey olympians k. d. singh, jaman lal sharma, mohammed shahid and ghaus mohammad, the tennis player who became the first indian to reach the quarter finals at wimbledon.
in october 2021, an ipl franchise based in lucknow was officially formed and was later named lucknow super giants. it will play its home matches at brsabv ekana cricket stadium.
city-based clubs
club  sport  team  homeground  founded   uttar pradesh cricket team  cricket  ranji trophy vijay hazare trophy syed musthaq ali trophy   brsabv ekana cricket stadium k.d singh babu stadium  1934   lucknow super giants  cricket  indian premier league  brsabv ekana cricket stadium  2021   awadhe warriors  badminton  premier badminton league  babu banarasi das indoor stadium  2015   uttar pradesh wizards  field hockey  hockey india league  major dhyan chand stadium  2012   up yoddha  kabaddi  pro kabaddi league  babu banarasi das indoor stadium  2017
