ludhiana
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

main article: economy of ludhiana
the neutrality of this section is disputed. relevant discussion may be found on the talk page. please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met. (october 2019) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
the world bank ranked ludhiana as the city in india with the best business environment in 2009 and 2013. the riches are brought mostly by small-scale industrial units, which produce industrial goods, machine parts, auto parts, household appliances, hosiery, apparel, and garments. ludhiana is asia's largest hub for bicycle manufacturing and produces more than 50% of india's bicycle production each year. ludhiana produces 60% of india's tractor parts and a large portion of auto and two-wheeler parts. many parts used in german cars such as mercedes and bmw are exclusively produced in ludhiana to satisfy the world requirement. it is one of the largest manufacturer of domestic sewing machines. hand tools and industrial equipment are other specialties. ludhiana contribute most to punjab than any other city.
feroze gandhi market, ludhiana
the apparel industry of ludhiana, popularly known as ludhiana hosiery industry provides employment to numerous people and produces india's largest share of winter clothing. it is especially known for its woollen sweaters and cotton t-shirts with the majority of india's woollen clothing brands being based here. ludhiana is also famous for its industry of shawls and stoles and satisfies the demand of major domestic and international brands. as a result of its dominance in the textile industry it is often dubbed as the manchester of india. ludhiana is know sourcing production to major corporate brands all over india. it is the cloths manufactured here in ludhiana that sells in big brand showrooms. ludhiana also has a growing it sector with multiple software services and product companies having development centers in the city.  in april 2021, bizmerlinhr, a hr management software firm with development center in ludhiana was awarded cool vendor in hcm for 2021 by industry analyst gartner.
ludhiana was home to the ludhiana stock exchange association. lse was situated on nh95 (chandigarh-ferozepur highway) in feroze gandhi market near mini secretariat ludhiana. the association is now defunct.
