madurai
Religious sites[edit]
religious sites[edit]

meenakshi amman templekazimar big mosque, the first and oldest mosque in the citymahavira at samanar hills
meenakshi amman temple is a historic hindu temple located on the south side of the vaigai river in madurai and is one of the most prominent landmarks of the city. it is dedicated to meenakshi and her consort, sundareswarar. the complex houses 14 gopurams (gateway towers) ranging from 45–50 metres (148–164 ft) in height, the tallest being the southern tower, 51.9 metres (170 ft) high. there are also two golden sculptured vimana (shrines) over the sanctum of the main deities. the temple is a significant symbol for tamils and has been mentioned since antiquity in tamil literature, though the present structure was built between 1623 and 1655 ce. as of 2016, the temple attracts on average 15,000 visitors a day, which grows to around 25,000 on fridays. there are an estimated 33,000 sculptures in the temple, and it was in the list of top 30 nominees for the "new7wonders of the world".
koodal azhagar temple is a vishnu temple located in the city. it has idols of the navagraha (nine planet deities), which are otherwise found only in shiva temples.
alagar koyil is a celebrated vishnu temple 21 kilometres (13 mi) northeast of madurai situated on the foothills of solaimalai. the deity, kallazhagar, is believed to be the brother of meenakshi, the presiding deity at the meenakshi temple. the festival calendars of these two temples overlap during the meenakshi thirukalyanam festival.
tirupparankunram is a hill 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) away from madurai where the hindu god murugan is said to have married deivanai. the temple is the first among the six abodes of murugan and is one of the most visited tourist spots in madurai, next only to the meenakshi amman temple. the temple has a wide range of hindu gods carved on the walls.
kazimar big mosque is the oldest islamic place of worship in the city. it was constructed under the supervision of kazi syed tajuddin, who was a descendant of islamic prophet muhammad. madurai maqbara the grave of meer ahmad ibrahim periya hazrat, meer amjad ibrahim chinna hazrat and syed abdus salam ibrahim saalim hazrat is located inside the mosque. kazi syed tajuddin came from oman and received the piece of land as a gift from the pandyan ruler kulasekara pandyan i, during the 13th century for the construction of the mosque. since its inception until today the mosque has been managed by descendants of kazi syed tajuddin and traditionally the kazis of madurai city to the govt. of tamil nadu are appointed from the descendants family. goripalayam mosque is located in gorippalayam, the name of which is derived from the persian word gor ("grave") and the graves of erstwhile sultanate rulers alauddin, shamsuddeen and habibuddin are found here. tirupparankunram dargah is located at the top of the thiruparankundram hill where the cemetery of sultan sikandhar badushah the then ruler of jeddah and madurai who travelled to india along with sulthan syed ibrahim shaheed of ervadi during the 12th century is located. st. mary's cathedral is the seat of the roman catholic archdiocese of madurai. samanar malai and panchapandavar malai are important jain centres.
