madurai
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in madurai
road[edit]
the national highways nh-44, nh-38 and nh-85 pass through madurai. the state highways passing through the city are sh-33, sh-72, sh-72a, sh-73 and sh-73a which connect various parts of madurai district. madurai is one of the seven circles of the tamil nadu state highway network. madurai is the headquarters of the tamil nadu state transport corporation (madurai) and provides local and inter-city bus transport across the districts of madurai, dindigul, sivagangai, theni, virudhunagar. madurai has three bus terminals, namely, m.g.r. bus stand aka mattuthavani bus stand is the second largest bus terminus in tamilnadu after chennai mofussil bus terminus.
m.g.r. bus stand (mattuthavani)
arappalayam (for inter city buses)
periyar bus stand (for intra city buses). there are 12,754 registered three-wheeled vehicles called auto rickshaws, which are commercially available for renting within the city. in addition to the government operated city buses, there are 236 registered private mini-buses that support local transportation.
rail[edit]
madurai junction is the major railway station serving the city. it is an important railway junction in southern tamil nadu and is one of the top 100 booking stations in indian railways. it is the headquarters of the madurai division of the southern railway. there are direct trains from connecting madurai with major cities and towns across india. the state government announced a monorail project for madurai called as madurai monorail in 2011, which is in planning stages.
air[edit]
madurai domestic airport, avaniyapuram
madurai airfield was first used by the royal air force in world war ii in 1942. the first passenger flight, a fokker friendship aircraft was from madras in 1956. madurai airport  established in 1957, is located at avaniyapuram, about 12 kilometres (7.5 mi) from the city. the airport was declared a customs airport in 2012 allowing limited number of international flights. it offers domestic flights to some cities in india and international services to colombo, dubai and for singapore on a daily basis started by air india express since february 2018. the carriers operating from the airport are air india, air india express, spicejet, indigo and srilankan airlines. the airport handled 842,300 passengers between april 2015 and march 2016. the airport identified as one of 35 non-metro airports for modernisation had a new integrated terminal building, which was inaugurated on 12 september 2010.
metro rail[edit]

main article: madurai metro
in 2021,the tamil nadu government under chief minister m.k. stalin proposed a metro for the city of madurai.
sea[edit]
the nearest major port is v. o. chidambaranar port trust in thoothukudi located nearly 150 km (93 mi) away from madurai connecting with nh38 national highway and 143 km (89 mi) from madurai airport which acts several industrial sectors to operate. there are several import and exporting activities in thoothukudi harbour to various countries like singapore and colombo. an initiative process by the tamil nadu government has announced to develop madurai-thoothukudi industrial corridor in the year of 2014 by the finance minister at the estimated cost of ₹1,83,819 crore and it covers 13 districts and fund released by tamil nadu infrastructure fund management company ltd
