madurai
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

harvey mills, c. 1914a software company at thirupparankundram
madurai was traditionally an agrarian society, with rice paddies as the main crop. cotton crop cultivation in the regions with black soil in madurai district was introduced during the nayaka rule during the 16th century to increase the revenue from agriculture. the paddy fields cultivated in the vaigai delta across madurai north, melur, nilakottai and uthamapalayam are known as "double-crop paddy belts". farmers in the district supplement their income with subsidiary occupations like dairy farming, poultry-farming, pottery, brick making, mat-weaving and carpentry. madurai is famed for its jasmine plantations, called "madurai malli", primarily carried out at the foothills of kodaikanal hills and traded at the madurai morning flower market. an average of 2,000 farmers sell flowers daily at the flower market.
with the advent of small scale industries (ssi) after 1991, the industrialisation of madurai increased employment in the sector across the district from 63,271 in 1992–93 to 166,121 persons in 2001–02. madurai is one of the few rubber growing areas in south india, and there are rubber-based industries in madurai. gloves, sporting goods, mats, other utility products and automobile rubber components are the most produced items by these industries. automobile manufacturers are the major consumers of rubber components produced in the city. there are numerous textile, granite and chemical industries operating in madurai.
madurai is promoted as a tier ii city for it and industry. kappalur which is sub-urban of madurai is business hub for automotive industries such as kun bmw, isuzu, volkswagen, toyota, mahindra, tata, maruti suzuki, mitsubishi, ashok leyland, jeep, fiat india (fca). the government has created utchapatti-thoppur satellite township in kappalur. small industries development corporation kappalur has many polymer and houseware manufacturing units.some software companies have opened their offices in madurai. software technology parks of india, an agency of the government of india, has authorised several such companies to receive benefits under its national information technology development program. the state government proposed two it-based special economic zones (sez) in madurai, and these have been fully occupied by various it companies, hcl technologies and honeywell have their own campuses in elcot it park in madurai.
