madurai
Media and utility services[edit]
media and utility services[edit]
the madurai bench of madras high court
the city hosts several radio stations, including the state-owned all india radio and private channels like hello fm, radio mirchi, suryan fm and radio city. the hindu, the new indian express and the times of india are the three principal english-language daily newspapers which have madurai editions. deccan chronicle, though not printed in the city, is another english-language daily newspaper available in the city. the most read tamil-language daily morning newspapers include dina malar, dina thanthi, dina mani and dinakaran – all these newspapers have editions from madurai. there are also daily tamil evening newspapers like tamil murasu, malai murasu and malai malar published in madurai. television broadcasting from chennai for whole of tamil nadu was started on 15 august 1975. direct-to-home cable television services are provided by dd direct plus and other private service providers.
electricity supply to the city is regulated and distributed by the tamil nadu electricity board (tneb). the city is the headquarters of the madurai region of tneb and along with its suburbs, forms the madurai metro electricity distribution circle, which is further divided into six divisions. water supply is provided by the madurai city corporation with overhead tanks and power pumps. in the period 2010–2011, a total of 950.6 lakh litres of water was supplied to 87,091 connections for households in madurai.
about 400 metric tonnes of solid waste are collected from the city every day by door-to-door collection, and the subsequent source segregation and dumping is carried out by the sanitary department of the madurai municipal corporation all the major channels in madurai are linked by the corporation to receive the flood water from primary, secondary and tertiary drains constructed along the roadsides to dispose of rain water. the sewer system was first established by the british in madurai in 1924 to cover the core city area, which covers 30 per cent of the present city area. it was further expanded in 1959 and 1983 by a corporation plan. the 2011 jawaharlal nehru national urban renewal mission covered 90 per cent of households with underground drainage system.
madurai comes under the madurai telecom district of the bharat sanchar nigam limited (bsnl), india's state-owned telecom and internet services provider. both global system for mobile communications (gsm) and code division multiple access (cdma) mobile services are available. apart from telecom, bsnl also provides broadband internet service and caller line identification (cli) based internet service netone.
a regional passport office was opened on 17 december 2007 and caters to the needs of nine districts. the city is served by the government rajaji hospital. a branch of all india institutes of medical sciences in thoppur, in the outskirts of the city, is set to be completed by 2022 as per central government press release.
