madurai
Culture and tourism[edit]
culture and tourism[edit]
gandhi memorial museum, one of the five gandhi sangrahalayas in india
madurai is popularly called thoonga nagaram meaning the city that never sleeps, on account of the active night life. the city attracts a large number of tourists from within the country and abroad. about 9,100,000 tourists visited madurai in 2010, including 524,000 foreigners. madurai is now attracting medical tourism also. the palace complex of thirumalai nayak palace was constructed in the indo-saracenic style by thirumalai nayakar in 1636 ce. it is a national monument maintained by the tamil nadu archaeological department. the daily sound and light show organised by the department explains the virtues of king thirumalai and the features of the palace. the palace of rani mangamma has been renovated to house one of the five gandhi sangrahalayas (gandhi memorial museum, madurai) in the country. it includes a part of the blood-stained garment worn by mahatma gandhi when he was assassinated by nathuram godse. a visit by dr.martin luther king jr. to the museum inspired him to lead peaceful protests against discrimination. the eco park, situated in tallakulam, features fountains and lighting in trees using optical fibres. rajaji children's park, maintained by the madurai municipal corporation, is situated between the gandhi museum and the tamukkam grounds. it has a visitor average of 5000 per day during holidays and 2000–3000 on working days.  madurai also has theme park, athisayam which is situated in paravai, madurai – dindugal main road. mgr race course stadium is an athletic stadium which has a synthetic track and a swimming pool. several national meets are held here. it also hosts several international and national level kabbadi championships.
pillared halls of thirumalai nayakar palace, built during 1636 ce and a national monument
the people of madurai celebrate numerous festivals, including meenakshi tirukkalyanam, the chittirai festival and the car festival. the annual 10-day meenakshi tirukalyanam festival, also called chittirai festival, is celebrated during april–may every year and attracts one million visitors. legend has it that the hindu god vishnu, as alagar, rode on a golden horse to madurai to attend the celestial wedding of meenakshi (parvati) and sundareswarar (shiva).before alagar reaches the wedding, the marriage will be completed and he does not cross the vaigai river. during this day there will be huge crowd will be present near the river too see lord alagar in the river.  during the cradle festival, the festive idols of meenakshi and sundareswarar are taken in procession to a mirror chamber and set on a rocking swing for nine days. avanimoolam festival is celebrated during september when the 64 sacred games of shiva, thiruvilayadal, are recited. the thepporchavam festival, or float festival, is celebrated on the full moon day of the tamil month thai, which falls around january – february, to celebrate the birth anniversary of king thirumalai nayak. the decorated icons of meenakshi and her consort are taken out in a procession from the meenakshi temple to the mariamman teppakulam. the icons are floated in the tank on a raft decked with flowers and flickering lamps. jallikattu is one of the most popular historical sport in tamil nadu, and is a part of the pongal festival (harvest festival) mattu pongal celebrated during january. the bull taming event is held in the villages surrounding madurai, and people from the neighbouring villages throng to the open grounds to watch man and bull pitting their strength against each other. the event was banned in the years 2014, 2015 and 2016 following an order by the supreme court of india. santhanakoodu festivals in madurai are celebrated on various days during the islamic calendar year to commemorate islamic saints. entertainment included shopping malls such as milan'em mall and vishaal de mal is being the south tamil nadu's biggest large format shopping mall, is located in chokkikulam, madurai. theaters such as inox leisure limited, big cinemas, thangaregal, and more than ten are playing the vital role in entertainment industry in madurai. courtyard by marriott, taj gateway hotel pasumalai, grt regency, the heritage hotels, germanus hotel, astoria, kadambavanam resort, poppy's hotel, lake view hotel and madurai residency are such a popular hotels. national cricket ground npr college ground is an artificial turf ground with a seating capacity of 5000 and flood lights. the ground has hosted 10 first class cricket matches and it is also a venue for tamil nadu premier league located 42 km (26 mi) away from madurai.
nearest popular hill station are kodaikanal 116 km (72 mi), sirumalai 90 km (56 mi), munnar 154 km (96 mi), kumily 138 km (86 mi) from madurai. rameswaram is historical hindu temple tourism center which is 170 km (110 mi) from madurai well connected with rail and road connectivity.
