malerkotla
History[edit]
history[edit]
main article: malerkotla state
malerkotla, a muslim majority state was established in 1454 a.d. by sheikh sadruddin-i-jahan from afghanistan, and was ruled by his sherwani descendants. the state of malerkotla was established in 1600 a.d. during the 1947 riots when punjab was experiencing heavy amounts of communal violence, the state of malerkotla remained relatively peaceful.
the roots of communal harmony date back to 1705, when zorawar singh and fateh singh  9 and 7 year old sons of tenth sikh guru, guru gobind singh, were ordered to be bricked alive by the governor of sirhind wazir khan. while his close relative, sher mohammed khan, nawab of malerkotla, who was present in the court, lodged a vehement protest against this act and said it was against the tenets of the quran and islam. wazir khan nevertheless had the boys bricked into a section of wall whilst still alive. at this, the nawab of malerkotla walked out of the court in protest. guru gobind singh on learning of this approach had blessed the nawab and the people of malerkotla that the city will live in the peace and happiness. in recognition of this act, the state of malerkotla did not suffer significantly during the partition of india, in which communal violence permeated throughout punjab.
under british colonial rule, a namdhari uprising was suppressed, and the colonial government ordered execution of 65 captured rebels and those thought to be involved with the rebellion. cowan (the deputy commissioner of ludhiana) and forsyth (the commissioner of ambala) ordered the namdharis to be executed with cannons, without any trial, on 17 and 18 january 1872.
during the partition of india, there were no riots or bloodshed in any part of maler kotla state. the last nawab iftikhar ali khan of malerkotla maintained calm and harmony during the turbulent period. he remained in india and died in the year 1982. his tomb is located in shahi grave yard situated at sirhandi gate, maler kotla. many also attribute this peace to the presence of the shrine of baba haidar sheikh, the sufi saint, who founded the town of malerkotla more than 500 years ago.
a part of the ruling family of sheikh sadr-ud-din sherwani migrated to pakistan and lived mostly in model town, lahore, muzzafargarh, khangarh.
malerkotla is famous for its vegetables and badge-making industry, besides its poets and monuments.
