mangalore
Education
education

main article: list of educational institutions in mangalore
national institute of technology karnataka (nitk) in surathkal is among the premier institutes of india
the districts of dakshina kannada and udupi are considered to be a major education corridor in india. deralakatte is a university and medical town in mangalore where universities like mangalore university, nitte, yenepoya, father mullers, and kanachur are situated. in schools and colleges which are below university-level, the media of instruction are mostly english and kannada, and english is used for teaching in universities.  schools and colleges in mangalore are either government-run or are operated by private trusts and individuals. schools are affiliated with either the karnataka state board, indian certificate of secondary education (icse), the central board of secondary education (cbse), or the national institute of open schooling (nios) boards.
here are some of the earliest schools and colleges established in mangalore, and their years of establishment
basel evangelical school (1838) milagres school (1848) rosario high school (1858) university college (1868) st. ann's high school (1870) st. aloysius college (1879) canara high school (1891) st. agnes pu college (1921) st. agnes college (autonomous) (1921) sacred hearts' school (1943) cascia high school (1946) carmel school (1951)
kasturba medical college which was established in 1953, was india's first private medical college and manipal college of dental sciences (mcods) was established in the city in 1987. a public library run by the corporation bank is located at mannagudda. mangalore university was established on 10 september 1980 to fulfil the higher-education needs of dakshina kannada, udupi and kodagu districts. it is a national assessment and accreditation council (naac)-accredited, four-star-level institution. nitk houses south india's first regional academy centre for space (rac-s) which was launched by isro.
