mangalore
Sports and pastimes
sports and pastimes

main article: sports in mangalore
mangalore golf course at pilikula
cricket is a popular sport in mangalore. local cricket stadia include mangala stadium and b.r. ambedkar cricket stadium (near nmpt). the sports authority of india (sai) has a sports training centre at mangala stadium. mangalore united is a karnataka premier league (kpl) franchise owned by fiza developers. mangalore premier league (mpl) is a cricket tournament organised by karnataka regional cricket academy. nehru maidan is an important local venue that hosts domestic, inter-school and intercollegiate tournaments. mangalore sports club (msc) has been elected as the institutional member for the mangalore zone of the karnataka state cricket association (ksca). lokesh rahul, commonly known as kl rahul and budhi kunderan, a former indian wicket-keeper are from mangalore. ravi shastri, who represented india for several years in international cricket as an all-rounder and captained the team, is of mangalorean descent.
football is also a popular sport in the city and is usually played in the maidans (grounds); the nehru maidan is the most popular venue for domestic tournaments. dakshina kannada district football association (dkdfa) annually organises the independence day cup, which is played on independence day at district football grounds adjacent to nehru maidan. schools and colleges from across dakshina kannada, udupi and kodagu districts participate and the matches are conducted under seven categories for children and young adults in education. chess is a popular indoor pastime in the city. mangalore is the headquarters of south kanara district chess association (skdca), which has hosted two all india open chess tournaments. other sports such as tennis, squash, billiards, badminton, table tennis and golf are played in clubs and gymkhanas in mangalore. pilikula nisargadhama, an integrated theme park, has an 18-hole golf course at vamanjoor. u s mallya indoor stadium offers sporting facilities for badminton and basketball players.
