mangalore
Media
media
all india radio's fm tower at kadri
mangaluru samachara, the first ever newspaper in kannada, was published in 1843 by hermann mögling of the basel mission. the first kannada-to-english dictionary was published in mangalore by ferdinand kittel in 1894. major national english-language newspapers such as times of india, the hindu, the new indian express, deccan herald and daijiworld publish localised mangalore editions. madipu (esteem), mogaveera, samparka (contact) and saphala (success) are the well-known tulu periodicals in mangalore.
popular konkani language periodicals published in the city are raknno (guardian), konknni dirvem (konkani treasure) and kannik (offering). beary periodicals published in mangalore include jyothi (light) and swatantra bharata (independent india). kannada-language newspapers are udayavani (morning voice) by manipal press ltd, vijaya karnataka (victory of karnataka) and vijayavani (voice of victory) by vrl group, prajavani (voice of the people), kannada prabha (kannada radiance), varthabharathi (indian news), samyukta karnataka (united karnataka), and hosa digantha (new horizon). the city's evening newspapers include karavali ale (waves from the coast), mangaluru mitra (friend of mangalore), sanjevani (evening voice), and jayakirana (rays of victory) are also published in the city. the konkani-language newspaper kodial khabar (mangalore news) is published fortnightly. malayalam newspapers such as malayala manorama (malayalam entertainer) and madhyamam (medium) publish localised mangalore editions.
the state-run, nationally broadcast television channel doordarshan provides national and local television coverage.  cable television also provides channels from independently owned private networks. canara tv and v4 digital infotech network, local multi system operators, transmits daily video news channels, live events and cultural programmes to the city through local channels. multiple local television channels broadcast programmes and news in tulu, konkani, beary and kannada; these include namma tv, v4 news and spandana. tulu channels are namma kudla and posa kural. all india radio (air) has a studio at kadri and broadcasts to mangalore on 100.3 mhz. mangalore's private fm stations include radio mirchi 98.3 fm, big 92.7 fm and red 93.5 fm. radio sarang 107.8 is a community radio station that is run by st. aloysius college.
mangalore is home to the tulu film industry which releases one film per month on average. popular tulu films include kadala mage (son of the sea) and suddha (the cleansing rites). tulu dramas which are mostly played in the town hall at hampankatta, are very popular. mangalore hosted the tulu film festivals in 2006 and 2015.
