mangalore
Culture
culture

main article: culture of mangalore
world konkani centre in mangalore
music and dance
many classical dance forms and folk art are practised in mangalore. yakshagana is a night-long dance and drama performance while pilivesha (tiger dance), a folk dance unique to the city, is performed during dasara and krishna janmashtami. karadi vesha (bear dance) is another well-known dance that is performed during dasara.
paddanas, ballad-like epics passed on verbally through generations, are sung by a community of impersonators in tulu and are usually accompanied by the rhythmic drum beats. the bearys' unique traditions are reflected in folk songs such as kolkai (sung during kolata, a valour folk-dance during which sticks are used as props), unjal pat (traditional lullaby), moilanji pat and oppune pat (sung at weddings). the evkaristik purshanv (konkani: eucharistic procession) is an annual catholic religious procession that is held on the first sunday of each year.
festivals
most of the popular indian festivals are celebrated, the most important are dasara, diwali, christmas, easter, eid and ganesh chaturthi. kodial theru, also known as mangaluru rathotsava (chariot festival) is unique to the goud saraswat brahmin community and is celebrated at the city's sri venkatramana temple.
the mangalore catholic community's unique festivals include monti fest (mother mary's feast), which celebrates the nativity feast and the blessing of new harvests. the jain milan, a committee that consists of jain families, organises the annual jain food festival, while mosaru kudike (curd pots feast), which is part of krishna janmashtami festival is celebrated by the whole community. special night prayers called taraveeh (rest and relaxation) are offered in mosques during the month of ramadan.
aati, a festival worshiping kalenja, a patron spirit of the city, is during the aashaadha month of hindu calendar. festivals such as karavali utsav (coastal festival) and kudlotsava (tulu: festival of mangalore) are celebrated with national and state-level performances in dance, drama and music. bhuta kola (spirit worship) is usually performed by the tuluva community at night. bhuta kola is similar to theyyam in kerala. nagaradhane (snake worship) is performed in praise of naga devatha (the serpent king), who is said to be the protector of all snakes. kori katta, an ancient ritual associated with the hindu temples in rural areas, a religious and spiritual cockfight, is held at the temples when permission is given by police.
cuisine

main article: mangalorean cuisine
neer dosa, a variant of dosa and pundi (rice ball), are native to mangalore
mangalorean cuisine is largely influenced by south indian cuisine; several local cuisines are unique to the diverse communities of the region. coconut, curry leaves, ginger, garlic, and chili are common ingredients in mangalorean curries. well-known mangalorean dishes include kori rotti, neer dosa, pundi (rice ball), patrode, golibaje and mangalore buns. mangalorean cuisine is also known for fish and chicken dishes like bangude pulimunchi (spicy sour silver-grey mackerels), boothai gasi (sardine semi-gravy), anjal fry, mangalorean chicken sukka, and chicken ghee roast. due to mangalore being a coastal city, fish is a staple of most people's diet. the konkani hindu community's specialties include daali thoy (lentil curry), bibbe-upkari (tender cashew-nut curry), val val (coconut-milk-based curry), ambat (vegetable-based coconut curry), avnas ambe sasam (pineapple-mango fruit salad), kadgi chakko (raw jackfruit-coconut curry), paagila podi (spine gourd fries), and chane gashi (chickpea curry). mangalorean catholics' dish sanna-dukra maas (sanna—idli fluffed with toddy or yeast; dukra maas—pork), pork bafat, sorpotel, and mutton biryani of the beary muslims are well-known dishes. pickles such as happala, sandige, and puli munchi are unique to mangalore. shendi (toddy) which is a country liquor prepared from coconut flower sap, is popular. vegetarian cuisine, also known as udupi cuisine, is known throughout the state and region.
