mangalore
Government and public services
government and public services
civic administration

main article: mangalore city corporation
mangalore city corporation at lalbagh
mangalore has a city area of 170 km (65.64 sq mi). municipal limits begin at surathkal in the north, netravati river bridge in the south, the western coast, and vamanjoor in the east. mangalore city corporation (mcc) came into existence in 1980; it is the municipal corporation in charge of the city's civic and infrastructural assets. the mcc council consists of 60 elected representatives which are called corporators, one from each of the city's 60 wards. a corporator from the ruling majority party is selected to be the mayor. mcc's headquarters are at lalbagh. mangalore urban development authority (muda) manages the planning, urban growth, and expansion of the city. the district commissioner is the chairperson of muda. the 44 projects which are listed as part of the smart cities mission programme are managed by mangalore smart city limited (mscl).
until the delimitation commission's revised the lok sabha and the legislative constituencies, mangalore contributed two members to the lok sabha; one for the southern part of the city that fell under the mangalore lok sabha constituency and another for the northern part of the city that fell under the udupi lok sabha constituency. after the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies in 2008, mangalore lok sabha constituency was replaced with dakshina kannada lok sabha constituency, resulting in mangalore being represented by one member of parliament (mp). additionally mangalore sends three members to the karnataka legislative assembly from mangalore city south, mangalore city north, and mangalore. the mangalore city police department is headed by a commissioner of police. mangalore is also the headquarters of the western range police, which covers the western districts of karnataka and is headed by an inspector general of police (igp).
healthcare
kmc hospital in mangalore
the city is served by various hospitals such as the kmc hospitals, father muller charitable institutions (fmci), aj hospital, and wenlock hospital. wenlock hospital, a teaching hospital of kmc mangalore has around 1000 beds and caters to the healthcare needs of the neighboring districts. mangalore is a hub for medical tourism and receives patients from foreign countries. from 2017–19, around 240 foreign nationals were treated in three hospitals across the city. approximately 50 per cent of the patients (the foreign nationals) arrived in 2018 and 2019. kmc, aj, and yenepoya hospitals have received the highest number of foreign patients, including those from the united states. at yenepoya hospital, 68 foreign nationals have availed treatment during 2017–19. the largest inflow of foreign patients into mangalore is from the gulf countries. deralakatte is a main healthcare hub of mangalore.
utility services
in mangalore, electricity is regulated by the karnataka power transmission corporation limited (kptcl) and distributed through mangalore electricity supply company (mescom). major state-owned enterprises such as mangalore refinery and petrochemicals limited (mrpl) and mangalore chemicals & fertilizers (mcf) operate their own captive power plants.
potable water is supplied to the city from a vented dam that was constructed across the netravati river at thumbe, 14 km (9 mi) from mangalore. the karnataka urban development and coastal environment management project (kudcemp) aims to improve safe water supply systems also reducing leakage and losses in the city's distribution system. the distribution and rehabilitation of the drinking water in the city are handled by the french company suez environnement. mangalore's official refuse disposal site is in vamanjoor. the city generates an average of 175 tonnes per day of waste, which is handled by the mcc's health department.
mangalore is the headquarters of the dakshina kannada telecom district, the second largest telecom district in karnataka. fixed-line telecom services are provided alongside gsm and code division multiple access (cdma) mobile services. prominent broadband internet service providers in the city include airtel and dataone by bharat sanchar nigam limited.
