mangalore
Transport
transport

main article: transport in mangalore
mangalore is the only city in karnataka to have all modes of transport—air, road, rail and sea.
jet bridge at the mangalore international airport
mangalore international airport (iata: ixe, icao: voml) is located near bajpe-kenjar and about 13 km (8 mi) north-east of mangalore city centre. it operates regular scheduled flights to major cities in india and the middle east. it is the second-largest and second-busiest airport in karnataka. new terminals and runways at the airport accommodate both cargo and passenger requirements. this airport is accredited by the airports council international (aci) under the airport health accreditation (aha) programme. state-government-run buses connect the city with the airport.
five national highways pass through mangalore. nh-66 (previously known as nh-17), which runs from panvel, maharashtra, to kanyakumari, tamil nadu, passes through mangalore in a north–south direction. nh-75 (previously known as nh-48) runs eastward to bangalore and vellore. nh-169 (previously known as nh-13) runs north-east from mangalore to shimoga. nh-73, a 315 km (196 mi)-long national highway connects mangalore to tumkur. nh-275 also connects mangalore with bangalore via mysore. national highways authority of india (nhai) is upgrading the national highways connecting new mangalore port to surathkal on nh-66 and bc road junction on nh-75. under the port connectivity programme of the national highways development project (nhdp), a 37.5 km (23 mi) stretch of these highways will be widened from two lanes to four.
mangalore's city bus service is dominated by private operators, which operate routes that extend beyond the city's boundary. bus services from mangalore are operated by the dakshina kannada bus operators' association (dkboa) and canara bus operators association (cboa). karnataka state road transport corporation (ksrtc) also runs bus services in the city. two distinct sets of routes for the buses exist; city routes are covered by city buses while intercity routes are covered by service and express buses. ksrtc also operates long-distance bus services that connect mangalore with other parts of the state. ksrtc jnnurm green city buses operate within the city limits.
clock tower to nehru maidan road
rail connectivity in mangalore was established in 1907; the city was the starting point of india's longest rail route. the city has three railway stations; mangalore central at hampankatta, mangalore junction at padil, and surathkal railway station. a railway track built through the western ghats connects mangalore with sakleshpur and hassan. the broad gauge track connecting mangalore to bangalore via hassan was opened to freight traffic in may 2006 and passenger traffic in december 2007. mangalore is also connected to chennai, mumbai, pune, bhatkal, karwar, surat, ajmer, and margao through the konkan railway.
mangalore harbour has shipping, storage, and logistical services; new mangalore port handles dry, bulk and fluid cargoes, and is equipped to handle petroleum oil lubricants, crude products and lpg containers. the indian coast guard has a station at new mangalore port. the artificial harbour is india's seventh largest container port and the only major port in karnataka. electronic visa (e-visa) facilities are available for travellers arriving in india at new mangalore port.
