mangalore
Etymology
etymology
1652 sanson map of india
mangalore was named after the deity mangaladevi, the presiding deity of the mangaladevi temple or a synonym of tara bhagvati of the vajrayana buddhist sect. according to local legend a princess named parimala or premaladevi from malabar renounced her kingdom and became a disciple of matsyendranath, the founder of the nath tradition. having converted premaladevi to the nath sect, matsyendranath renamed her mangaladevi. she arrived in the area with matsyendranath but had to settle near bolar in mangalore because she fell ill on the way. when she died, the people consecrated the mangaladevi temple at bolar in her honour. the city was named for the temple.
one of the earliest references to the city's name was in 715 ce when pandyan king chettian called the city mangalapuram. the city and the coastal region were part of the pandyan kingdom. according to k.v. ramesh, president of the place names society of india, mangaluru was first used in 1345 ce during the vijayanagar rule. many shilashasanas (stones) of the vijayanagar period refer the city as mangalapura. before then during the alupa dynasty period, it was referred to as mangalapura (mangala means 'auspicious'). in the kannada language, the city is known as mangaluru, a reference to mangaladevi (the suffix uru means town or city). mangalore was an important centre of indian ocean trade on malabar coast in earlier times. hence it was also known by the name manjalūr in arabic. during british rule from 1799, the anglicised version mangalore became the official appellation. according to historian george m. moraes, however, the word mangalore is the portuguese corruption of mangaluru. the city's name appears on maps as far back as the 1652 sanson map of india.
mangalore's diverse communities have different names for the city in their languages. in tulu which is the region's primary spoken language, the city is called kudla, meaning junction because it is situated at the confluence of the netravati and gurupura rivers. in konkani mangalore is referred to as kodiyal and the beary name for the city is maikala. in malayalam the city is called "mangalapuran". mangalore was officially renamed to "mangaluru" by the karnataka government on 1 november 2014.
