mathura
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
rail[edit]
mathura junction railway station lies on the delhi-mumbai rail route.
mathura junction railway station is situated on the major delhi-mumbai rail route. both central railway and western railway routes pass through mathura. trains from ncr (north-central railway) to er (eastern railway) also pass through the mathura junction. mathura cantt railway station is a major route for eastern and central railway.
important trains that originate/terminate at mathura are:
12177/howrah – mathura chambal express.
road[edit]
mathura is well-connected by road to the rest of india. national highway nh-19(previously nh-2) from delhi to kolkata, with diversion for chennai also passes through mathura. yamuna expressway from greater-noida to agra (165 km 6 lane access controlled express highway) also passes through, providing good connectivity to noida, agra, kanpur and lucknow.
tram[edit]
a tram network has been proposed in the city, which would make mathura the second only city in india (besides kolkata) to have a functional tram transport. in 2017, the local mla shrikant sharma announced that the trams will be operational in mathura and vrindavan by 2018.
air[edit]
currently the city has no airport. the nearest airports are the agra airport (about 60 km away) and the delhi airport (about 160 km away) with major national and international air routes.the under-construction jewar airport in greater noida is approximately 75 km from mathura and is expected to be country's largest airport when fully operational. land has been earmarked, and construction is in progress near the yamuna expressway, with plans to open in the next five years with regular flights to major national and international air routes in future.
in 2012, the then civil aviation minister ajit singh suggested mathura's name for the site of a new greenfield international airport to the then chief minister of uttar pradesh, akhilesh yadav. mathura's name came to note when a group of ministers terminated the plan of building taj international airport at agra.
