meerut
Education[edit]
education[edit]

main article: list of educational institutions in meerut district
chaudhary charan singh university
meerut is an education hub of western uttar pradesh with near about four or five universities, approximately 50 engineering colleges, 23 management colleges, seven pharmacy colleges, four colleges offering hotel management, one college offering fashion design, over 150 academic colleges and over 50 schools. the city is home to chaudhary charan singh university (formerly meerut university), sardar vallabhbhai patel university of agriculture and technology, swami vivekanand subharti university, shobhit institute of engineering & technology and iimt university. the city has one government-run engineering college, sir chhotu ram institute of engineering and technology, a constituent college of chaudhary charan singh university. there are schools affiliated to recognized boards such as icse, cbse, ib and the state board. one such school is the st. john's sr. sec school (established by begum samru) which is over 130 years old, also the first ib school in uttar pradesh was vidya global school.
shobhit institute of engineering & technology is the only deemed-to-be university in meerut district. it was notified in 2006 by ministry of hrd, government of india u/s 3 of ugc act 1956.
shri venkateshwara university recognized by ugc, located in amroha near meerut.
iimt engineering college which is now called iimt university is the oldest engineering institute of meerut district. it was established in 1997.
chaudhary charan singh university (ccsu) is a public and state university which has many degree colleges affiliated to it. they fall in two divisions: saharanpur and meerut with nine districts including saharanpur, meerut, muzaffarnagar, shamli, gautam budh nagar, bagpat, hapur, bulandshahr and ghaziabad administered by vice-chancellor and registrar (pcs officer). the indian film and television institute is located at the western bypass of the city. the city has three medical colleges: lala lajpat rai memorial medical college, subharti medical college and mulayam singh yadav medical college & hospital.
notable schools[edit]
st. mary's academy, meerut st. thomas' english medium school
