meerut
Administration[edit]
administration[edit]
general administration[edit]
meerut division which consists of six districts, and is headed by the divisional commissioner of meerut, who is an ias officer of high seniority, the commissioner is the head of local government institutions (including municipal corporations) in the division, is in charge of infrastructural development in his division. the district magistrate of meerut reports to the divisional commissioner. the current commissioner is surendra singh.
meerut district administration is headed by the district magistrate of meerut, who is an ias officer. the dm is in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government and oversees the elections held in the city. the district is subdivided into three tehsils, namely meerut, mawana and sardhana, each headed by a sub-divisional magistrate. the tehsils are further divided into 12 blocks. the current district magistrate of meerut is depak meena.
police administration[edit]
meerut district comes under meerut police zone and meerut police range of uttar pradesh police. meerut zone is headed by an ips officer in the rank of additional director general of police (adg), whereas meerut range is headed by an ips officer in the rank of inspector general of police (ig). the current adg, meerut zone is rajeev sabharwal, whereas the current ig, meerut range is praveen kumar.
district police of meerut is headed by the senior superintendent of police (ssp) who is an ips officer. he is assisted by four superintendents of police (sp)/additional superintendent of police (addl. sp) (city, rural area, traffic and crime). the meerut district is divided into numerous police circles, each headed by a circle officer in the rank of deputy superintendent of police. sp (traffic) and sp (crime) are assisted by one circle officer in the rank of deputy superintendent of police each. the current ssp is rohit singh sajwan.
infrastructure and civic administration[edit]
the development of infrastructure in the city is overseen by the meerut development authority (mda), which comes under the housing department of uttar pradesh government. the divisional commissioner of meerut acts as the ex-officio chairman of mda, whereas a vice-chairman, a government-appointed ias officer, looks after the daily matters of the authority. the current vice-chairman of meerut development authority is sita ram yadav.
the city is administered by meerut municipal corporation, which is responsible for performing civic administrative functions administered by municipal commissioner (pcs officer) whereas mayor is ceremonial head of the corporation. the current municipal commissioner of meerut municipal corporation is manoj kumar chauhan.
central government offices[edit]
the office of the chief commissioner, customs & central excise, meerut zone, has jurisdiction over 13 districts of uttrakhand and 14 districts of uttar pradesh. this jurisdiction was carved out of the lucknow zone. it comprises the erstwhile customs & central excise commissionerates of meerut & noida. the meerut commissionerate was bifurcated into two commissionerates, namely, ‘meerut-i and ghaziabad’ and the noida commissionerate was bifurcated into ‘noida and meerut-ii’. in addition, jurisdiction of central excise division bareilly was included in the jurisdiction of meerut-ii commissionerate. cghs department of meerut provides comprehensive health care facilities for the central govt employees and pensioners and their dependents residing in this city.
district management[edit]
the janikhurd block is established on 1 october 1962. the rohta block is established on 1 october 1959. the daurala block is established on 1 october 1962. the rajpura block is established on 1 october 1959. the kharkhoda block is established on 1 october 1959. the mawana block is established on 1 april 1957. the meerut block is established on 1 april 1957. the hastinapur block is established on 1 april 1963. the sardhana block is established on 26 january 1955. the saroorpur khurd block is established on 1 april 1959. the machchhara block is established on 1 october 1961. the parikshitgarh block is established on 1 april 1958.
