meerut
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
mustafa castle was built in 1900
most traditional indian festivals, including holi, dussehra, diwali, eid among others are celebrated with fervor in the city. notably, a fair by the name of nauchandi fair is held two weeks after holi every year. the fair, which started in 1672, continues for about 15 days and is attended by lakhs of people. it includes events such as poetry recitations in hindi, urdu, punjabi etc. khariboli is the local dialect with official business conducted in either hindi-urdu or english.
meerut is the headquarters of the roman catholic meerut diocese, which covers the districts of meerut, muzaffarnagar, saharanpur, dehradun, haridwar, moradabad, rampur, jyotiba phule nagar, ghaziabad, baghpat and dhampur tehsil of bijnor district.
nauchandi mela (fair)[edit]

main article: nauchandi mela
one of the entrance gates of nauchandi mela ground at meerut.
the nauchandi mela is an annual fair held at nauchandi ground in meerut. the fair stretches for about a month and is organized by the municipal corporation of meerut. it generally starts from the second sunday after holi. the main exhibits are the artistic and religious rituals followed in rustic uttar pradesh. the fair witness more than 50,000 visitors every year. the indian railways' nauchandi express train is named after this fair.
the fair has a prominent history dating back several hundreds of years. it started in the year 1672 ad as a one-day cattle trading fair. the fair has been held every year, excluding 1858, the year after 1857 revolt, which started from meerut.
since then cattle trading has been replaced by a number of other activities. the fair feature shops for lucknow's chikan work, moradabad's brassware, varanasi's carpets, rugs and silk sarees, agra's footwear, meerut's leather items, etc. meerut's own products like sports goods, scissors, gajaks, nan-khatai are also sold. giant rides, wheels, circus and various other recreational arenas where artists perform stunts, remains a big attraction of the fair.
film and television[edit]
meerut is home to a film industry, which has a following in western uttar pradesh and haryana. the films are usually folklore stories or comedies or localised versions of bollywood hits. the films which have been shot here include sonu ke titu ki sweety, zero, and rajma chawal.
notable people from meerut in the film and television industry include bharat bhushan, aziz mian, mandakini, achint kaur, kailash kher, chitrangada singh, vishal bhardwaj, deepti bhatnagar and pravesh rana.
