meerut
Tourist destinations[edit]
tourist destinations[edit]
ashtapad jain temple, hastinapur ncr
augarnath temple at 2nd navratri night
statue of mangal pandey at martyr's memorial
this section contains embedded lists that may be poorly defined, unverified or indiscriminate. please help to clean it up to meet wikipedia's quality standards. where appropriate, incorporate items into the main body of the article. (june 2021)
tourist destinations in and around meerut include:
digamber jain bada mandir hastinapur – located on the banks of the old ravine of ganges, hastinapur ncr is considered one of the holiest places on earth by jains. it is believed to be the birthplace of three jain tirthankaras. there are many ancient jain temples in hastinapur ncr. shri digamber jain mandir, jambudweep, kailash parvat rachna, shwetambar jain temple are the main and famous temples in hastinapur ncr. apart from jain temples, pandeshwar temple, historical gurdwara and hastinapur sanctuary are worth being seen. government freedom struggle museum and shaheed smarak - government freedom struggle museum, meerut was established in 1997. it is located in the shaheed smarak compound on delhi road, about 6 km north-east from the city railway station and at a distance of about 200 meters from the delhi bus station. visitors can stay in various guesthouses, private lodges and hotels.the museum’s main aim is the collection, preservation, documentation and exhibition of cultural property and to make it available for educational activities as well as for creation of awareness about our glorious past.some postal stamps, pictures, post cards, memorial coins related to the events of 1857 and latter coins are also in the collection of the museum. the museum is in the developing stages and efforts are being made to collect more specimens. the museum organises educational programs such as lectures, seminars and competitions related to history, culture, philosophy, the freedom struggle and religion.it also aims at coordinating with other cultural and educational organizations for disseminating indian culture and particularly the events related to the long drawn freedom struggle of india. museum timings : 10:30 am. to 4:30 pm. open on all days except monday, sunday following 2nd saturday of the month and public holidays. shahi jama masjid – the jama masjid was built by hasan mahdi, sultan mahmud ghaznavi's wazir (=chief minister) in 1019 ad (older than the qutb minar). it is considered the first masjid in north india. although it was restored by humayun, it is one of the oldest mosques in india. some believe that the first north indian mosque is quwwat/qubbat ul islam in delhi and then adhai din ka jhonpra in ajmer. st. john's church – this church was established by chaplain the reverend henry fisher on behalf of the east india company in 1819 in the cantonment area and was completed in 1822. it is considered one of the oldest churches in north india. the church was dedicated to the people by bishop wilson. it has a seating capacity of 10,000 people. during the war of 1857, this church was the scene of heavy fighting between indians and the british forces. augarnath temple – this temple (also known as kalipaltan mandir locally) is located at the site where the soldiers of the war of 1857 planned their operations. the temple also houses a memorial built to honour the martyrs of the indian rebellion of 1857. the old temple has been replaced by a modern version. mansabiya karbala – mansabiya's mosque and karbala was built by nawab mansab ali khan in 1882. martyr's memorial (shaheed smarak): the memorial is a 30 metres (98 feet) high pillar of marble situated at bhainsali. functions are organised at the memorial around the national holidays of india. the memorial complex also houses the government freedom struggle museum which is dedicated to the first war of indian independence.
an entrance to gandhi bagh
shahpeer's mausoleum (shahpeer ki dargah) – this is a mughal mausoleum erected by the empress nur jahan in 1628 in honour of a local muslim hazrat shahpeer. it is a red stone structure that was partly built and is incomplete till date. the tomb is adorned by intricate nakkashi (stone painting). there is no roof on the main tomb. it is said that shahpeer was the teacher of mughal emperor jehangir. the tomb is listed by the archaeological survey of india as a national heritage monument. parikshitgarh fort – the place is associated with and derives its name from king parikshit of hastinapur ncr (the grandson of arjuna). the fort was built by parikshit and restored by gurjar raja nain singh in the eighteenth century. dargah of baley miyan (bale miyan ki dargah) – this dargah was built by qutb-ud-din aybak in 1194 in the memory of ghazi saiyyad salar masud (known locally as baley miyan). an urs is organised annually at the dargah during the nauchandi fair. it is adjacent to the chandi devi mandir, which signifies the hindu-muslim unity.
other places of interest include mansa devi temple, baleni, basilica of our lady of graces, sardhana and the chandi devi temple which was built by holkar queen devi ahiliyabai holkar.
