midnapore
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
train[edit]
midnapore railway station
midnapore station platform
midnapore railway station is connected not only to larger cities in the region, but also to smaller towns and villages in the district.  this railway station is situated on the kharagpur–bankura–adra line. many local and passenger trains ply all day between howrah and midnapore as well as adra and midnapore. apart from these local trains, many major express trains also pass through midnapore including the jhargram-medinipur jangalmahal express, delhi-puri nandan kanan express, howrah-lokmanya tilak t samarsatta express, puri-patna express, ernakulam-patna express, malda town-digha express etc. midnapore is close to kharagpur, a major hub of the south eastern railway is 13 kilometres.
at present the midnapore railway section is undergoing a development process. the station complex is undergoing modernisation. the platforms are being increased in length. work is in process to double the railway line between kharagpur junction and midnapore railway station. apart from an existing railway bridge on the kangsabati river, a new double line railway bridge has been constructed (carrying traffic from 4 march 2012) to smoothen the railway traffic.
local transportation[edit]
selected thoroughfares of midnapore have been expanded and maintained in an ongoing "megacity" project started in 1997. the major roads are now upgraded, well lighted and one way with divider. a long-awaited flyover connecting rangamati over the railway gate minimised the traffic congestion at rush hours. some of the smaller roads in the city are still unpaved and are difficult to use during and after the monsoon months. to compound the problems faced by inhabitants there are a limited number of bridges crossing the kasai river affording entry from howrah and kolkata (nh6). nevertheless, the ongoing construction of the new interstate highway system which passes by midnapore has reduced the time it takes for inhabitants to reach kolkata. a set of traffic control signals was recently installed in the city, and this helps control traffic.  motorized and bicycle traffic has been increasing in recent years.  within the city, previously cycle rickshaws were one of the few modes of public transportation since effective lobbying by rickshaw-pullers who depend on this for their livelihood had prevented the introduction of town buses and auto rickshaws. now auto-rickshaws covering the different routes of the city like railway station, vidyasagar university, amtala, central bus stand, battala, golkunwar chawk, sipoy bazar by sharing basis, which is a big boost for the city's development.
