midnapore
Education[edit]
education[edit]
universities[edit]
science block of vidyasagar university
vidyasagar university is the only university of the city. it has a campus in the western part of the city. there are 39 colleges in the districts of east midnapore and west midnapore, affiliated to this university. on 18 may 2022, west bengal chief minister mamata banerjee who was on an official tour in the city, declared that midnapore college will be granted university status.
colleges[edit]
midnapore college was created out of the midnapur collegiate school in 1873. though an autonomous institute was previously under vidyasagar university and, calcutta university. it is located in raja bazaar, a busy area of the city. industrial training institute, midnapore is a technical vocational institute located in rangamati. midnapore homoeopathic medical college and hospital. midnapore law college is a relatively recent addition. this is situated at its new campus built at rangamati. midnapore medical college and hospital is a newborn institute, the newest medical college in west bengal. after a lot of controversy regarding its recognition by the medical council of india, it has finally been permitted to conduct the mbbs course under section 10 (a) for 2005–06. recently, bsc nursing course has also been started. raja narendra lal khan mahila mahavidyalaya (gope college:)- this is the only women's college in the district. the lavish campus is located on premises donated by the raaj rulers of narajole. vidyasagar institute of health, rangamati, offers courses in medical and paramedical technology. oriental institute of science and technology – offers postgraduate courses on biotechnology and biochemistry. vidyasagar teachers' training college also known as bed college. medinipur sadar government polytechnic – technical college in midnapore town midnapore art college
schools[edit]
dav public school, midnapore, this is the only cbse affiliated school in midnapore city managed by davcmc, new delhi. this school was established in the year 1993 and initially it was sponsored & managed by midnapore marwari sammelan. later on after a year or two, it came under the control of davcmc, new delhi. gurguripal high school. jawahar navodaya vidyalaya, paschim medinipur midnapore collegiate school (for boys) established in 1834, is one of the oldest schools in bengal as well as india. the students and teachers of this school made contributions in indian freedom movement during the british rule. khudiram bose, a martyr in the freedom struggle is one of the notable alumni of this school. midnapur collegiate girls' high school midnapore town school mission girls' high school is one of the girls' schools. mahasweta devi, magsaysay award recipient completed elementary school here. keranitola shree shree mohanananda vidyamandir sri narayan vidyabhaban boys' high school nirmal hriday ashram catholic church high school is a school run by catholic missionaries and has both girls' and boys' section. it runs a primary section in the morning. locally it is known as the "church school". rangamati kironmoyee high school, popularly known as rangamati high school. aligunj rishi raj narayan balika vidyalaya, popularly known as aligung girls school, is another school for girls.- ramakrishna mission vidyabhaban, midnapore. vidyasagar shishu niketan: icse & isc affiliated school in the city. one of the best in the district. vidyasagar vidyapith, popularly known as bangla school is also a rather old institute. this has separate boys' and girls' section. vidyasagar vidyapith girls' high school
