mirzapur
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]
ghanta ghar(clock tower) of mirzapur
for quite some years mirzapur has been a destination for tourists, particularly for people from adjoining states, owing mainly to the ghats, temples, and the clock tower (ghanta ghar) which are excellent examples of contemporary architecture.
vindhyachal[edit]

main article: vindhyachal
a few miles away from the city is a site of a pilgrimage for hindus known as vindhyachal where according to the mythology a part of sati (an avatar of durga) fell. the river ganges flows through this city. other sites of pilgrimage include kali khoh (literally 'the cave of the goddess kali') where a statue of the kali has a mouth formed in the shape of a cave, hence the name. very close to the city is a waterfall. the city itself has many ghats (steps to a river).
ghanta ghar (clock tower)[edit]
the famous ghanta ghar of mirzapur is located in the premises of city corporation, about 3 km from the mirzapur railway station. currently not functioning, it was constructed in the year 1891, with its entire structure made up of finely carved stone and a 1000 kg alloy bell hanging from the tall structure.
ghats[edit]

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (august 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
view from the shastri setu
steps at nar ghat
ojhala bridge
the ojhala bridge was constructed by mahant parshuram giri in vikram samvat 1772. this valuable heritage connecting the cities of mirzapur and vindhyachal, with fort like minarets and ramparts on the either side of the bridge, provide a fine instance of contemporary architecture.
pakka ghat
another very popular ghat in mirzapur is pakka ghat known for vide variety of shops on both side of staircases descending towards the ganges. the shops include jewellery, makeup & beauty, clothing and footwear etc.
siddhanath ki dari fall in mirzapur district.
narghat road leading to the footsteps(ghat)
