mohali
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (august 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
places of tourist interest in and around this region include the following:
fateh burj
religious places[edit]
gurudwara amb sahib[edit]
gurudwara amb sahib
gurudwara amb sahib is a historical shrine situated in sector 62, mohali commemorates the visit of the 7th guru of sikhs, guru har rai. the place also commemorates the meeting of guru har rai with his famous sikh bhai kuram, a labana trader. this shrine is managed by sgpc, amritsar.
shri shiv mandir[edit]
shiv mandir, phase 1, mohali
shri shiv mandir is an old hindu temple dedicated to shiva, situated in phase1.
gurudwara singh shaheedan[edit]
this shrine is situated in the village sohana, close to sector 70 constructed in memory of the martyrdom of jathedar baba hanuman singh, a nihang jathedar. he, along with 500 sikhs, attained martyrdom at this place in a battle against british forces during the anglo-sikh wars.
dera dargah sharif bakarpur[edit]
dargah sharif bakarpur,mohali
this shrine is situated in the village bakarpur, in aerocity, near mohali airport. this shrine is home of ali and five pirs. sai surinder singh is currently the chief dera head of this dargah.
parks and gardens[edit]
nature park, phase 8 rose garden, phase 3b1 bougainvillea garden, phase 4 silvy park, phase 10 valley park, phase 8 ekta park, phase 7 (near chawla chowk) mohali musical fountain park, sector 70 city park, sector 68
markets and other places[edit]
main market, phase - 7,  sas nagar main market, phase - 4,  sas nagar main market, phase - 3,  sas nagar main market, phase - 1,  sas nagar main market, phase - 5,  sas nagar main market, phase - 10,  sas nagar punjab cricket association stadium,  sas nagar international hockey stadium, phase-9 gurudwara amb sahib, phase - 8
chowks of mohali[edit]
the famous chowks of mohali, which replicate one of the best features of the city are:
yps chowk diplast chowk airport chowk
