moradabad
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
aaftab, one of the main handicraft items of moradabad
moradabad is a major industrial city of uttar pradesh and one of india's biggest export hubs. its metalcrafts industry alone accounts for more than 40% of total handicraft exports from india.
in 2007, moradabad's export turnover was ₹3200 crores which had increased to ₹4000 crores in 2012.
by 2018 it had a metalcraft business turnover of ₹9700 crores out of which ₹5400 crores was export revenue and the same year moradabad was counted amongst india's manufacturing hubs by the economic times.
and by the year 2020 it had increased further to reach ₹15000 crores out of which ₹10000 crores was export revenue.
in october 2014, livemint included moradabad in its list of "25 emerging cities to watch out for in 2025".
export[edit]
moradabad is popularly known as the brass city of the country. countries like britain, the us, middle east, germany and canada import brassware from moradabad. in moradabad, there are about 600 export units and 9000 industries in the district. moradabad exports goods worth rs. 4500 crore yearly. products such as iron sheet, metal wares, aluminum, artworks and glassware are exported. the export of mint is done in several crores from moradabad. due to upsurge of exports and popularity in foreign particularly in america, europe, italy and other countries, a large number of exporters are launching their units and started their export. moradabad is one of the seven industrial corridors declared by  the  state government in industrial policy 1999–2002.
mohammed yar khan is known as the founder of moradabad's brass industry; he migrated from afghanistan in the 1800s and started the export industry. he was awarded various medals from british empire exhibitions in united kingdom.
special economic zone[edit]
moradabad special economic zone (sez), the only uttar pradesh government developed sez in northern india, headed by the development commissioner, noida sez and locally governed by the assistant development commissioner, was set up in 2003 at pakbara – dingarpur road in moradabad on a 421.565-acre plot of land. government of up, through upsidc, being developers to this sez project has so far invested a sum of ₹1100 million on its development. moradabad sez provides excellent infrastructure, supportive services and sector specific facilities for the handicraft trade. proximity to delhi/ ncr and availability of skilled and dedicated manpower makes it ideal for setting up various industries in handicrafts & its allied filed. moradabad sez was operationalized since april, 2007 when it started with only one unit, however till today in spite of the global slowdown in the handicraft trade for past four years; this zone has now 22 operational units. moradabad sez has 465 developed plots of varying sizes. future expansion of this has been strategically planned and soon it will be available for few more export sectors.
infrastructure, supportive services and trade related facilities have been substantially upgraded during the last few years. moradabad sez offers access to the global telecommunication network, uninterrupted power supply and efficient local transport system. an ultra-modern rsu telephone exchange has been installed in the zone, besides the availability of all the mobile frequencies in and around the zone through various mobile communication towers. an independent feeder line has since been provided for uninterrupted power supply, the reliability and quality of power supply has improved with the pre-commissioned 32 / 11 kva / 5.0 mva  power sub-station within moradabad sez. proximity to delhi/ ncr provides easy access to the financial and commercial infrastructure of the capital. customs wing ensures prompt and on the spot clearances of export/import consignments through web based system called "sezonline".
