moradabad
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
road[edit]
moradabad bus station
the following national highways and state highways pass through or are connected with moradabad:
national highway 24 – connects new delhi to lucknow via ghaziabad, bareilly, shahjahanpur and sitapur. it has been made four-lane between moradabad and new delhi. four-laning of the highway between bareilly and sitapur is underway. from sarai kale khan delhi to hapur construction of an access-controlled expressway is underway, and from hapur to moradabad work of six-laning has started.
it is essentially from delhi via ghaziabad and moradabad to rampur. part of this highway is also a part of the ah2 (asian highway 2), which connects denpasar, indonesia to merak and singapore to khosravi, iran.
national highway 509 – also known as national highway 93, it connects moradabad to agra via chandausi, aligarh and hathras. national highway 734 – connects moradabad with jaspur uttrakhand. union minister of road and transport nitin gadkari on 20 february 2019 laid down the foundation stone of four-laning of this highway. state highway 43 – connects moradabad to the historical city of badaun, which is 102 km away, and farrukhabad, which is 210 km away, via bisauli. it also extends to kanpur. state highway 49 – connects moradabad to haridwar, merging into state highway 78 at dhampur. state highway 76 – connects moradabad to bijnor via noorpur. state highway 78 – connects moradabad to amroha via pakbara. mdr65 w – connects moradabad to kashipur via thakurdwara. moradabad–sambhal four-lane highway.
rail[edit]
moradabad railway station
inside moradabad junction railway station
moradabad railway station is one of the major railway stations of indian railways. it lies on lucknow-moradabad line, delhi-moradabad line and moradabad-ambala line. more than 250 trains pass through and stop at moradabad railway station every day. it is directly connected with delhi, lucknow, kanpur, agra, aligarh, ghaziabad, jaipur, jodhpur, haridwar, dehradun, amritsar, ludhiana, ambala, guwahati, dibrugarh, kolkata, jamshedpur, varanasi, ahmedabad, patna. shatabdi express, rajdhani express, garib-rath express many super fast, mail and passenger trains stop at moradabad. moradabad is called an inter-change station due to a five line junction. moradabad railway station is one of the oldest railway station of india. it was built in 1873, and was electrified in 2012.
moradabad railway station was the main station built by oudh and rohilkhand railway.
amenities moradabad railway station is category 'a' railway station. it has a tourist information centre, post office, telegraph office, general railway police office, computerized reservation counters, retiring room, vegetarian and non vegetarian refreshment rooms, tea stall and bookstall. it also has the tatkal seat booking counter.
electrification electrification of the 636 km (395 mi) long mughasarai-moradabad line was completed in 2013.
air[edit]
moradabad airport is under construction. the nearest international airport is indira gandhi international airport, new delhi, 178 km away.
bareilly airport is a nearest major domestic airport to moradabad which is located around 85km from moradabad,it is connected to cities like mumbai, new delhi and bengaluru with direct flights
