motihari
Notable people[edit]
notable people[edit]
george orwell
ramesh chandra jha
thakur ramapati singh
anant kumar
george orwell, author of animal farm and nineteen eighty-four, was born in motihari in 1903. his father, richard walmesley blair, was a deputy posted in the opium department in bihar. when he was one year old, george left for england with his mother and sister. the town of motihari was largely unaware of its connection with orwell. in 2003, motihari discovered its role in orwell's life when a number of journalists arrived in the town for orwell's hundredth birthday. local officials are making plans for the construction of a museum on orwell's life. at the beginning of 2021, some miscreants had stolen and vandalized the bust of george orwell, which was soon recovered and restored at its place by the administration. towards the end of 2021, the house of george orwell was repaired and renovated by the administration, and now it wears a fresh look in 2022.  bihar's art, culture and youth affairs department has made the author's house in motihari, where he was born on june 25, 1903, a protected site. in 1904, his wife ida blair along with her children including an infant eric blair, who would later become a famous novelist by the name of george orwell, moved to england never to return to india. built on an area of 2.48-acre, orwell's home was inaugurated as a museum in may 2015. khan bahadur azizul huq, one of the two indian police officers who worked with edward henry in the development of fingerprint classification, known as the henry classification system, died in motihari in 1933. "it was khan bahadur azizul huq who evolved a mathematical formula to supplement henry's idea of sorting slips in 1024 pigeon holes, based on fingerprint patterns. rai bahadur hem chandra bose made further contribution to the fingerprint science by evolving an extended system of sub classification, a telegraphic code for finger impression and a system of single-digit classification."
both haque and bose eventually received honoraria and recognition from the government of india. at the time of final approval of the honorarium for haque, the home department (government of india) noted, "it appears from the information now received that he (haque) was sir edward henry's principal helper in perfecting the scheme and he actually himself devised the method of classification which is in universal use. he thus contributed most materially to a discovery which is of worldwide importance and has brought a great credit to the police of india." upon retirement from the police service in bengal and bihar, khan bahadur azizul huq settled in motihari, and he is buried there.
a.f. salahuddin ahmed, national professor of bangladesh, a grandson of khan bahadur azizul huq was born in motihari in 1924. he was educated at presidency university, kolkata, university of pennsylvania, and university of london, and taught at eminent universities in bangladesh: jagannath college, rajshahi university, jahangir nagar university, dhaka university, and independent university, bangladesh, and wrote many books and articles in professional journals and newspapers. in one of his books, perspectives on history, society and politics, he argued that despite the political divisions that took place in south asia in 1947, the people of this vast region belong to "one indivisible civilisation which is the product of over a thousand years of historical development" and that the destinies of the people inhabiting the subcontinent are closely interlinked. they must therefore learn to live together in peace, as this is essential for their development and progress. ramesh chandra jha, a modern hindi poet, author and freedom fighter belonged to phulwariya village in motihari. thakur ramapati singh, a freedom fighter, mla, minister, and mp from motihari. anant kumar (born 1969 in katihar/bihar), a german author, translator and literary critic of indian descent. he spent his childhood in motihari where his father rajendra prasad was professor of psychology at munshi singh college. he resides in kassel, germany. royal city gotha (free state thueringia, germany) honored kumar as a resident writer in 2015. kumar worked 2016 as a fellow in the symposium for dramatic writing at volturno, italy. university of kassel has picked kumar among prominent alumni on its diamond jubilee celebration 2021. anuranjan jha, journalist, tv anchor and social worker. ravish kumar, tv anchor and journalist, ndtv delhi. abdullah khan (author) is a novelist, screenwriter and banker. radha mohan singh, union minister of agriculture & farmers welfare. sakibul gani, first cricketer in the world to score a triple century on his first class debut.
