mumbai
Utility services
utility services

see also: mumbai's water sources
under colonial rule, tanks were the only source of water in mumbai, with many localities having been named after them. the mcgm supplies potable water to the city from six lakes, most of which comes from the tulsi and vihar lakes. the tansa lake supplies water to the western suburbs and parts of the island city along the western railway. the water is filtered at bhandup, which is asia's largest water filtration plant. india's first underground water tunnel was completed in mumbai to supply water to the bhandup filtration plant.
about 700 million (70 crore) litres of water, out of a daily supply of 3.5 billion (350 crore) litres, is lost by way of water thefts, illegal connections and leakages, per day in mumbai. almost all of mumbai's daily refuse of 7,800 metric tonnes, of which 40 metric tonnes is plastic waste, is transported to dumping grounds in gorai in the northwest, mulund in the northeast, and to the deonar dumping ground in the east. sewage treatment is carried out at worli and bandra, and disposed of by two independent marine outfalls of 3.4 km (2.1 mi) and 3.7 km (2.3 mi) at bandra and worli respectively.
electricity is distributed by the brihanmumbai electric supply and transport (best) undertaking in the island city, and by reliance energy, tata power, and the maharashtra state electricity distribution co. ltd (mahavitaran) in the suburbs. power supply cables are underground, which reduces pilferage, thefts and other losses.
cooking gas is supplied in the form of liquefied petroleum gas cylinders sold by state-owned oil companies, as well as through piped natural gas supplied by mahanagar gas limited.
the largest telephone service provider is the state-owned mtnl, which held a monopoly over fixed line and cellular services up until 2000, and provides fixed line as well as mobile wll services. mobile phone coverage is extensive, and the main service providers are vodafone essar, airtel, mtnl, loop mobile, reliance communications, idea cellular and tata indicom. both gsm and cdma services are available in the city. mumbai, along with the area served by telephone exchanges in navi mumbai and kalyan is classified as a metro telecom circle. many of the above service providers also provide broadband internet and wireless internet access in mumbai. as of 2014, mumbai had the highest number of internet users in india with 16.4 million (1.64 crore) users.
