mumbai
Culture
culture

main article: mumbai culture
the asiatic society of mumbai is one of the oldest public libraries in the city.
mumbai's culture offers a blend of traditional and cosmopolitan festivals, food, entertainment, and night life. the city's cosmopolitan and urban-centric modern cultural offerings are comparable to other world capitals. mumbai bears the distinction of being the most cosmopolitan city of india. its history as a major trading centre and the expansion of an education middle class has led to a diverse range of cultures, religions, and cuisines coexisting in the city. the variety and abundance of restaurants, cinemas, theatres, sports events and museums are a product of mumbai's unique cosmopolitan culture.
mumbai is the birthplace of indian cinema—dadasaheb phalke laid the foundations with silent movies followed by marathi talkies—and the oldest film broadcast took place in the early 20th century. mumbai also has a large number of cinema halls that feature bollywood, marathi and hollywood movies. the mumbai international film festival and the award ceremony of the filmfare awards, the oldest and prominent film awards given for hindi film industry in india, are held in mumbai. despite most of the professional theatre groups that formed during the british raj having disbanded by the 1950s, mumbai has developed a thriving "theatre movement" tradition in marathi, hindi, english, and other regional languages.
contemporary art is featured in both government-funded art spaces and private commercial galleries. the government-funded institutions include the jehangir art gallery and the national gallery of modern art. built in 1833, the asiatic society of bombay is one of the oldest public libraries in the city. the chhatrapati shivaji maharaj vastu sangrahalaya (formerly the prince of wales museum) is a renowned museum in south mumbai which houses rare ancient exhibits of indian history.
mumbai has a zoo named jijamata udyaan (formerly victoria gardens), which also harbor's a garden. the rich literary traditions of the city have been highlighted internationally by booker prize winners salman rushdie, aravind adiga. marathi literature has been modernized in the works of mumbai-based authors such as mohan apte, anant kanekar, and gangadhar gadgil, and is promoted through an annual sahitya akademi award, a literary honor bestowed by india's national academy of letters.
girgaum chowpatty beach. beaches are a popular tourist attraction in the city.
mumbai residents celebrate both western and indian festivals. diwali, holi, eid, christmas, navratri, good friday, dussera, moharram, ganesh chaturthi, durga puja and maha shivratri are some of the popular festivals in the city. the kala ghoda arts festival is an exhibition of a world of arts that encapsulates works of artists in the fields of music, dance, theatre, and films. a week-long annual fair known as bandra fair, starting on the following sunday after 8 september, is celebrated by people of all faiths, to commemorate the nativity of mary, mother of jesus, on 8 september.
the banganga festival is a two-day music festival, held annually in the month of january, which is organised by the maharashtra tourism development corporation (mtdc) at the historic banganga tank in mumbai. the elephanta festival—celebrated every february on the elephanta islands—is dedicated to classical indian dance and music and attracts performers from across the country. public holidays specific to the city and the state include maharashtra day on 1 may, to celebrate the formation of maharashtra state on 1 may 1960, and gudi padwa which is the new year's day for marathi people.
beaches are a major tourist attraction in the city. the major beaches in mumbai are girgaum chowpatty, juhu beach, dadar chowpatty, gorai beach, marve beach, versova beach, madh beach, aksa beach, and manori beach. most of the beaches are unfit for swimming, except girgaum chowpatty and juhu beach. essel world is a theme park and amusement centre situated close to gorai beach, and includes asia's largest theme water park, water kingdom. adlabs imagica opened in april 2013 is located near the city of khopoli off the mumbai-pune expressway.
