mumbai
Politics
politics
first session of the indian national congress in bombay (28–31 december 1885)
mumbai had been a traditional stronghold and birthplace of the indian national congress, also known as the congress party. the first session of the indian national congress was held in bombay from 28 to 31 december 1885. the city played host to the indian national congress six times during its first 50 years, and became a strong base for the indian independence movement during the 20th century.
the 1960s saw the rise of regionalist politics in bombay, with the formation of the shiv sena on 19 june 1966, under the leadership of balasaheb thackeray out of a feeling of resentment about the relative marginalisation of the native marathi people in bombay. shiv sena switched from 'marathi cause' to larger 'hindutva cause' in 1985 and joined hands with bhartiya janata party (bjp) in the same year. the congress had dominated the politics of bombay from independence until the early 1980s, when the shiv sena won the 1985 bombay municipal corporation elections.
in 1989, the bharatiya janata party (bjp), a major national political party, forged an electoral alliance with the shiv sena to dislodge the congress in the maharashtra legislative assembly elections. in 1999, several members left the congress to form the nationalist congress party (ncp) but later allied with the congress as part of an alliance known as the democratic front. other parties such as maharashtra navnirman sena (mns), samajwadi party (sp), bahujan samaj party (bsp), all india majlis-e-ittehadul muslimeen (aimim) and several independent candidates also contest elections in the city.
in the indian national elections held every five years, mumbai is represented by six parliamentary constituencies: north, north west, north east, north central, south central, and south. a member of parliament (mp) to the lok sabha, the lower house of the indian parliament, is elected from each of the parliamentary constituencies. in the 2019 national election, all six parliamentary constituencies were won by the bjp and shiv sena in alliance, with both parties winning three seats each.
in the maharashtra state assembly elections held every five years, mumbai is represented by 36 assembly constituencies. a member of the legislative assembly (mla) to the maharashtra vidhan sabha (legislative assembly) is elected from each of the assembly constituencies. in the 2019 state assembly election, out of the 36 assembly constituencies, 16 were won by the bjp, 11 by the shiv sena, 6 by the congress, 2 by the ncp and one by independent candidate.
elections are also held every five years to elect corporators to power in the mcgm. the corporation comprises 227 directly elected councillors representing the 24 municipal wards, five nominated councillors having special knowledge or experience in municipal administration, and a mayor whose role is mostly ceremonial. in the 2012 municipal corporation elections, out of the 227 seats, the shiv sena-bjp alliance secured 107 seats, holding power with the support of independent candidates in the mcgm, while the congress-ncp alliance bagged 64 seats. the tenure of the mayor, deputy mayor, and municipal commissioner is two and a half years.
