mumbai
Education
education

see also: list of educational institutions in mumbai § schools, and list of colleges in mumbai
rajabai clock tower at the university of mumbai is part of the victorian and art deco ensemble, a unesco world heritage site.
schools
schools in mumbai are either "municipal schools" (run by the mcgm) or private schools (run by trusts or individuals), which in some cases receive financial aid from the government. the schools are affiliated with either of the following boards:
maharashtra state board (msbshse) the all-india council for the indian school certificate examinations (cisce) the national institute of open schooling (nios) the central board for secondary education (cbse) the international baccalaureate (ib) the international general certificate of secondary education (igcse). marathi or english is the usual language of instruction.
the primary education system of the mcgm is the largest urban primary education system in asia. the mcgm operates 1,188 primary schools imparting primary education to 485,531 students in eight languages (marathi, hindi, gujarati, urdu, english, tamil, telugu, and kannada). the mcgm also imparts secondary education to 55,576 students through its 49 secondary schools.
higher education
university of mumbai is one of the largest universities in the world.
under the 10+2+3/4 plan, students complete ten years of schooling and then enrol for two years in junior college, where they select one of three streams: arts, commerce, or science. this is followed by either a general degree course in a chosen field of study, or a professional degree course, such as law, engineering and medicine. most colleges in the city are affiliated with the university of mumbai, one of the largest universities in the world in terms of the number of graduates.
the university of mumbai is one of the premier universities in india. it was ranked 41 among the top 50 engineering schools of the world by america's news broadcasting firm business insider in 2012 and was the only university in the list from the five emerging brics nations viz brazil, russia, india, china and south africa. moreover, the university of mumbai was ranked 5th in the list of best universities in india by india today in 2013 and ranked at 62 in the qs brics university rankings for 2013, a ranking of leading universities in the five brics countries (brazil, russia, india, china and south africa). its strongest scores in the qs university rankings: brics are for papers per faculty (8th), employer reputation (20th) and citations per paper (28th). it was ranked 10th among the top universities of india by qs in 2013. with 7 of the top ten indian universities being purely science and technology universities, it was india's 3rd best multi disciplinary university in the qs university ranking.
indian institute of technology bombay is a premier engineering institute in the country.
the indian institute of technology bombay (iit bombay), mumbai, institute of chemical technology (formerly udct / uict), veermata jijabai technological institute (vjti), which are india's premier engineering and technology schools, along with sndt women's university are the autonomous universities located in mumbai. in april 2015, iit bombay launched the first u.s.-india joint emba program alongside washington university in st. louis. thadomal shahani engineering college is the first and the oldest private engineering college affiliated to the federal university of mumbai and is also pioneered to be the first institute in the city's university to offer undergraduate level courses in computer engineering, information technology, biomedical engineering and biotechnology. grant medical college established in 1845 and seth g.s. medical college are the leading medical institutes affiliated with sir jamshedjee jeejeebhoy group of hospitals and kem hospital respectively. mumbai is also home to national institute of industrial engineering (nitie), jamnalal bajaj institute of management studies (jbims), narsee monjee institute of management studies (nmims), s p jain institute of management and research, tata institute of social sciences (tiss) and several other management schools. government law college and sydenham college, respectively the oldest law and commerce colleges in india, are based in mumbai. the sir j. j. school of art is mumbai's oldest art institution. it also has one of the best law schools or universities of the country which is national law universities (nlu).
mumbai is home to two prominent research institutions: the tata institute of fundamental research (tifr), and the bhabha atomic research centre (barc). the barc operates cirus, a 40 mw nuclear research reactor at their facility in trombay.
bombay veterinary college now mumbai veterinary college is the oldest and premier veterinary college of india and asia. its foundation stone is laid in the year of 1886.
the icar-central institute of fisheries education (cife) is a deemed to be university and institution of higher learning for fisheries science in mumbai, india. cife has over four decades of leadership in human resource development with its alumni aiding in the development of fisheries and aquaculture worldwide, producing notable contributions to research and technological advancements to its credit. the institute is one of four deemed to be universities operating under the indian council for agricultural research (icar); the other three being the indian veterinary research institute (ivri), the [national dairy research institute] (ndri) and the indian agriculture research institute (iari)
