mumbai
Media
media

see also: list of mumbai radio stations
the times of india's first office is opposite the chhatrapati shivaji terminus where it was founded.
mumbai has numerous newspaper publications, television and radio stations. marathi dailies enjoy the maximum readership share in the city and the top marathi language newspapers are maharashtra times, navakaal, lokmat, loksatta, mumbai chaufer, saamana and sakaal. popular marathi language magazines are saptahik sakaal, grihashobhika, lokrajya, lokprabha & chitralekha. popular english language newspapers published and sold in mumbai include the times of india, mid-day, hindustan times, dna india, and the indian express. newspapers are also printed in other indian languages. mumbai is home to asia's oldest newspaper, bombay samachar, which has been published in gujarati since 1822. bombay durpan, the first marathi newspaper, was started by balshastri jambhekar in mumbai in 1832.
numerous indian and international television channels can be watched in mumbai through one of the pay tv companies or the local cable television provider. the metropolis is also the hub of many international media corporations, with many news channels and print publications having a major presence. the national television broadcaster, doordarshan, provides two free terrestrial channels, while three main cable networks serve most households.
the wide range of cable channels available includes zee marathi, zee talkies, etv marathi, star pravah, mi marathi, dd sahyadri (all marathi channels), news channels such as abp majha, ibn-lokmat, zee 24 taas, sports channels like espn, star sports, national entertainment channels like colors, sony, zee tv and star plus, business news channels like cnbc awaaz, zee business, et now and bloomberg utv. news channels entirely dedicated to mumbai include sahara samay mumbai. zing a popular bollywood gossip channel is also based out of mumbai. satellite television (dth) has yet to gain mass acceptance, due to high installation costs. prominent dth entertainment services in mumbai include dish tv and tata sky.
there are twelve radio stations in mumbai, with nine broadcasting on the fm band, and three all india radio stations broadcasting on the am band. mumbai also has access to commercial radio providers such as sirius. the conditional access system (cas) started by the union government in 2006 met a poor response in mumbai due to competition from its sister technology direct-to-home (dth) transmission service.
bollywood, the hindi film industry based in mumbai, produces around 150–200 films every year. the name bollywood is a blend of bombay and hollywood. the 2000s saw a growth in bollywood's popularity overseas. this led filmmaking to new heights in terms of quality, cinematography and innovative story lines as well as technical advances such as special effects and animation. studios in goregaon, including film city, are the location for most movie sets. the city also hosts the marathi film industry which has seen increased popularity in recent years, and tv production companies. mumbai is a hub of indian film making. several other indian language films such as bengali, bhojpuri, gujarati, malayalam, tamil, telugu and urdu are also occasionally shot in mumbai. slumdog millionaire, an english language british film, was shot entirely in mumbai and has garnered 8 oscar awards.
