mumbai
Civic administration
civic administration
headquarters of the brihanmumbai municipal corporation (bmc). the bmc is the largest civic organisation in the country.
greater mumbai (or brihanmumbai), an area of 603 km (233 sq mi), consisting of the mumbai city and mumbai suburban districts, extends from colaba in the south, to mulund and dahisar in the north, and mankhurd in the east. its population as per the 2011 census was 12,442,373.
it is administered by the brihanmumbai municipal corporation (bmc) (sometimes referred to as the municipal corporation of greater mumbai), formerly known as the bombay municipal corporation (bmc). the bmc is in charge of the civic and infrastructure needs of the metropolis. the mayor, who serves for a term of two and a half years, is chosen through an indirect election by the councillors from among themselves.
the municipal commissioner is the chief executive officer and head of the executive arm of the municipal corporation. all executive powers are vested in the municipal commissioner who is an indian administrative service (ias) officer appointed by the state government. although the municipal corporation is the legislative body that lays down policies for the governance of the city, it is the commissioner who is responsible for the execution of the policies. the commissioner is appointed for a fixed term as defined by state statute. the powers of the commissioner are those provided by statute and those delegated by the corporation or the standing committee.
the brihanmumbai municipal corporation was ranked 9th out of 21 cities for best governance & administrative practices in india in 2014. it scored 3.5 on 10 compared to the national average of 3.3.
the bombay high court exercises jurisdiction over maharashtra, goa, dadra and nagar haveli and daman and diu.
the two revenue districts of mumbai come under the jurisdiction of a district collector. the collectors are in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government, and oversee the national elections held in the city.
the mumbai police is headed by a police commissioner, who is an indian police service (ips) officer. the mumbai police is a division of the maharashtra police, under the state home ministry. the city is divided into seven police zones and seventeen traffic police zones, each headed by a deputy commissioner of police. the mumbai traffic police is a semi-autonomous body under the mumbai police. the mumbai fire brigade, under the jurisdiction of the municipal corporation, is headed by the chief fire officer, who is assisted by four deputy chief fire officers and six divisional officers. the mumbai metropolitan region development authority (mmrda) is responsible for infrastructure development and planning of mumbai metropolitan region.
mumbai is the seat of the bombay high court, which exercises jurisdiction over the states of maharashtra and goa, and the union territory of dadra and nagar haveli and daman and diu. mumbai also has two lower courts, the small causes court for civil matters, and the sessions court for criminal cases. mumbai also has a special terrorist and disruptive activities (tada) court for people accused of conspiring and abetting acts of terrorism in the city.
