mumbai
Sports
sports

33,000 people can be accommodated in the wankhede stadium.built in 1883, mahalaxmi racecourse was created out of a marshy land known as mahalakshmi flats.
cricket is more popular than any other sport in the city. mumbai is home to the board of control for cricket in india (bcci) and indian premier league (ipl). mumbai cricket team, the first-class team of the city has won 41 ranji trophy titles, the most by any team. the city based mumbai indians compete in the indian premier league. mumbai has two international cricket grounds, the wankhede stadium and the brabourne stadium. the first cricket test match in india was played in mumbai at the bombay gymkhana. the biggest cricketing event to be staged in the city so far is the final of the 2011 icc cricket world cup which was played at the wankhede stadium. mumbai and london are the only two cities to have hosted both a world cup final and the final of an icc champions trophy which was played at the brabourne stadium in 2006.
football is another popular sport in the city, with the fifa world cup and the english premier league being followed widely. in the indian super league, the city is represented by mumbai city fc. while the city based kenkre fc competes in the i-league (matches in the city are played at the cooperage ground). when the elite football league of india was introduced in august 2011, mumbai was noted as one of eight cities to be awarded a team for the inaugural season.
mumbai's first professional american football franchise, the mumbai gladiators, played its first season, in pune, in late 2012.
in hockey, mumbai is home to the mumbai marines and mumbai magicians in the world series hockey and hockey india league respectively. matches in the city are played at the mahindra hockey stadium.
the indian badminton league (ibl), now known as the premier badminton league is also visiting mumbai since its inaugural edition in 2013 when the final was held in mumbai's national sports club of india. in the second season, the final of the 2016 premier badminton league was held between home-squad mumbai rockets and the delhi dashers (formerly delhi acers), the visitors eventually claiming the title. the opening ceremony was also held in mumbai while the finals in delhi. in the 2017 premier badminton league (also known as vodafone pbl 2017 for sponsorship reasons) the mumbai rockets beat the hyderabad hunters 3–1 to proceed to the final. in the final they lost 3–4 to the chennai smashers.
u mumba is the team representing mumbai in the country's professional kabaddi league, pro kabaddi. the mumbai leg of pro kabaddi is held at the nsci, worli.
rugby is another growing sport in mumbai with league matches being held at the bombay gymkhana from june to november.
every february, mumbai holds derby races at the mahalaxmi racecourse. mcdowell's derby is also held in february at the turf club in mumbai. in march 2004, the mumbai grand prix was part of the f1 powerboat world championship, and the force india f1 team car was unveiled in the city, in 2008. in 2004, the annual mumbai marathon was established as a part of "the greatest race on earth". mumbai had also played host to the kingfisher airlines tennis open, an international series tournament of the atp world tour, in 2006 and 2007.
mumbai will host the 140th ioc session in 2023.
regional and professional sports teams from mumbai
team/club  tournament/league  sport  venue  established   mumbai cricket team  ranji trophy vijay hazare trophy syed musthaq ali trophy   cricket  wankhede stadium brabourne stadium   1930   maharashtra football team  santosh trophy  football  –  1941   kenkre fc  i-league  football  cooperage ground  2000   mumbai indians  indian premier league  cricket  wankhede stadium brabourne stadium   2008   mumbai marines  world series hockey  field hockey  mahindra hockey stadium  2011   mumbai gladiators  elite football league of india  american football  –  2012   mumbai magicians  hockey india league  field hockey  mahindra hockey stadium  2012   mumbai rockets  premier badminton league  badminton  national sports club of india  2013   mumbai city fc  indian super league  football  mumbai football arena  2014   u mumba  pro kabaddi league  kabaddi  sardar vallabhbhai patel indoor stadium  2014   mumbai tennis masters  champions tennis league  tennis  kalina stadium  2014   mumbai challengers  uba pro basketball league  basketball  –  2015
former regional and professional sports teams from mumbai
team/club  tournament/league  sport  venue  established  ceased   mumbai champs  indian cricket league  cricket  n/a  2007  2009   mumbai masters  premier badminton league  badminton  national sports club of india  2013  2016

