munger
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
rail[edit]
munger railway station
munger has two railway stations known as: jamalpur junction and munger railway station. the former is the main railhead for the city while the latter, which was earlier called purabsarai railway station, acts as suburban facility. stations are connected with sahibganj loop.
the rail system provides connection to cities such as new delhi, mumbai,surat, yesvantpur junction, jamshedpur, jammu tawi, dibrugarh, guwahati, lucknow, patna, ranchi, agartala, hyderabad, deoghar junction, muzaffarpur junction and dhanbad. the munger ganga bridge, which takes both rail and road-traffic, connects munger to the nearby cities of begusarai, saharsa junction, katihar and khagaria junction as well as various districts of north bihar. the bridge is the third-largest rail-cum-road bridge in india.
road[edit]
munger is connected to major parts of india by various national and state highways. the major cities of bihar and jharkhand - such as patna, ranchi, bhagalpur, purnia, bihar sharif, muzaffarpur, jamshedpur, dhanbad, gaya, bokaro and darbhanga - can be reached by  nh 33,  nh 333b,  nh 333a,  nh 31 and  nh 333 and various state highways. regular bus service are provided by bsrtc for all the major cities and other destinations. citybuses, taxies, autorikshaw, e-rickshaw, etc. are available all the times in the entire city for transportation.

the munger ganga bridge link munger to various districts of north bihar and north-eastern india by 2021.
air[edit]
munger airport is located in safyabad, which is 5 km from munger. it was re-inaugurated by chief minister nitish kumar on 24 may 2016. munger has no international airport with commercial service. domestic airport with commercial service is jay prakash narayan airport in patna around 180 km away, which is served by all major airlines.
nearest international airport is netaji subhash chandra bose international airport in kolkata which is around 480 km away from munger.
