muzaffarnagar
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
bada darwaza in vill. kakrauli front gate
shiv chowk
st. john's church
railway station

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (january 2018) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
muzaffarnagar connected by road and railway networks. the ghaziabad - saharanpur line passes through the city. indian railways provides connections to new delhi, western uttar pradesh, jammu & kashmir, punjab, south india, and other parts of the country. dehradun shatabdi express and dehradun jan shatabdi express trains pass through and halt at the muzaffarnagar station.
nh-58 passing through m.nagar
the national highway - 58 (nh-58) passes through muzaffarnagar city. this highway provides connections towards delhi on the southern direction and upper reaches of the himalayas in the uttarakhand state in the northern direction. the highway is the backbone of road transportation for the muzaffarnagar city as well as the garhwal region of uttarakhand. cities and areas of hardwar, rishikesh, dehradun as well as badrinath and kedarnath are served by this highway.
city transportation mostly consists of tricycles and 3-wheeled vehicles, rickshaws. an international airport, muzaffarnagar international airport, was proposed in the city in order to reduce the traffic at the indira gandhi international airport, however, the same was transferred to the jewar airport.
environmental concerns[edit]
muzaffarnagar lies approximately halfway on the road from delhi to uttarakhand rishikesh (the nh-58). as a result, many roadside resorts and eateries have sprung up on the highway near the city. especially, the town of khatauli is famed for its canal side forest park named "cheetal". once visited for the sight of deer and rabbits and other wild animals, the cheetal is now encroached by privately owned dhabas and resorts thus sidelining the animals.
