mysore
Administration and utilities[edit]
administration and utilities[edit]

main article: mysore city corporation
mysore palace
mysore taluk map as per 2011 census
the civic administration of the city is managed by the mysore city corporation, which was established as a municipality in 1888 and converted into a corporation in 1977. overseeing engineering works, health, sanitation, water supply, administration and taxation, the corporation is headed by a mayor, who is assisted by commissioners and council members. the city is divided into 65 wards and the council members (also known as corporators) are elected by the citizens of mysore every five years. the council members, in turn, elect the mayor. the annual budget of the corporation for the year 2011–2012 was ₹4.27 billion (equivalent to ₹7.5 billion or us$94 million in 2020). among 63 cities covered under the jawaharlal nehru national urban renewal mission, mysore city corporation was adjudged the second best city municipal corporation and was given the "nagara ratna" award in 2011.
urban growth and expansion is managed by the mysore urban development authority (muda), which is headed by a commissioner. its activities include developing new layouts and roads, town planning and land acquisition. one of the major projects undertaken by muda is the creation of an outer ring road to ease traffic congestion. citizens of mysore have criticised muda for its inability to prevent land mafias and ensure lawful distribution of housing lands among city residents. the chamundeshwari electricity supply corporation is responsible for electric supply to the city.
drinking water for mysore is sourced from the kaveri and kabini rivers. the city got its first piped water supply when the belagola project was commissioned in 1896. as of 2011, mysore gets 193,000 cubic metres (42.5 million imperial gallons) of water per day. mysore sometimes faces water crises, mainly during the summer months (march–june) and in years of low rainfall. the city has had an underground drainage system since 1904. the entire sewage from the city drains into four valleys: kesare, malalavadi, dalavai and belavatha. in an exercise carried out by the urban development ministry under the national urban sanitation policy, mysore was rated the second cleanest city in india in 2010 and the cleanest in karnataka.
the citizens of mysore elect five representatives to the legislative assembly of karnataka through the constituencies of chamaraja, krishnaraja, narasimharaja, hunsur and chamundeshwari. mysore city, being part of the larger mysore lok sabha constituency, also elects one member to the lok sabha, the lower house of the indian parliament. the politics in the city is dominated by three political parties: the indian national congress (inc), the bharatiya janata party (bjp), and the janata dal (secular) (jds).
