mysore
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]
sri chamarajendra zoological gardens
st. philomena's church
mysore is a major tourist destination in its own right and serves as a base for other tourist attractions in the vicinity. the city receives many tourists during the ten-day dasara festival. one of the most visited monuments in india, the amba vilas palace, or mysore palace, is the centre of the dasara festivities. the jaganmohana palace, the sand sculpture museum the jayalakshmi vilas and the lalitha mahal are other palaces in the city. chamundeshwari temple, atop the chamundi hills, and st. philomena's church, wesley's cathedral are notable religious places in mysore.
temple carvings at keshava temple somnathapura
the mysore zoo, established in 1892, the karanji, kukkarahalli and the blue lagoon lake are popular recreational destinations. blue lagoon is a lake with a mini island located behind the krs water dam, from which it is mesmerising to watch the sunset and sunrise. mysore has the regional museum of natural history, the folk lore museum, the railway museum and the oriental research institute. the city is a centre for yoga-related health tourism that attracts domestic and foreign visitors, particularly those who, for years, came to study with the late ashtanga vinyasa yoga guru k. pattabhi jois.
a short distance from mysore city is the neighbouring mandya district's krishnarajasagar dam and the adjoining brindavan gardens, where a musical fountain show is held every evening. places of historic importance close to mysore are mandya district's ranganathaswamy temple, srirangapatna. and other historical places are somanathapura and talakad. b r hills, himavad gopalaswamy betta hill and the hill stations of ooty, sultan bathery and madikeri are close to mysore. popular destinations for wildlife enthusiasts near mysore include the nagarahole national park, the wildlife sanctuaries at melkote, mandya and b r hills and the bird sanctuaries at ranganathittu, mandya and kokrebellur, mandya. bandipur national park and mudumalai national park in tamil nadu, which are sanctuaries for gaur, chital, elephants, tigers, leopards and other threatened species, lie between 60 and 100 kilometres (37 and 62 mi) to the south. other tourist spots near mysore include the religious locations of nanjanagud and bylakuppe and the waterfalls at neighbouring districts of mandya's shivanasamudra.
