mysore
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

further information: economy of the kingdom of mysore and mysore silk
infosys office at hebbal, mysore
tourism and it are the major industries in mysore. the city attracted about 3.15 million tourists in 2010. mysore has traditionally been home to industries such as weaving, sandalwood carving, bronze work and the production of lime and salt. it has many big it companies like infosys and wipro. the planned industrial growth of the city and the state was first envisaged at the mysore economic conference in 1911. this led to the establishment of industries such as the mysore sandalwood oil factory in 1917 and the sri krishnarajendra mills in 1920. mysore has emerged as an industrial hub in karnataka next to bangalore. mysore is part of the bidar-mysore industrial corridor. major drivers of the economy are tourism, finance, manufacturing and industry which includes chemicals, petrochemicals, machinery, automobile, engineering, textiles and food processing sectors. a new industrial corridor plan is underway between mysore and bangalore.
for the industrial development of the city, the karnataka industrial areas development board (kiadb) has established four industrial areas in and around mysore, in the belagola, belawadi, hebbal and hootagalli areas. one of the major industrial areas near mysore is nanjangud which will be a satellite town to mysore. nanjangud industrial area hosts a number of industries like at&s india pvt ltd, nestle india ltd, reid and taylor, jubiliant, tvs, and asian paints. nanjangud industrial area also boasts being 2nd highest vat / sales taxpayer which is more than ₹4 billion (us$50 million) after peenya which is in state capital bangalore. jk tyre has its manufacturing facility in mysore. the city has emerged as a hub of automobile industries in karnataka.
the major software companies in mysore are infosys, arisglobal, larsen & toubro infotech, excelsoft technologies and triveni engineering. the growth of the information technology industry in the first decade of the 21st century has resulted in the city emerging as the second largest software exporter in karnataka (as of), next to bangalore. mysore also has many shopping malls, including the mall of mysore which is one of the largest malls in india and karnataka. retail is also a major part of the economy in mysore.
mysore also hosts many central government organizations like cftri, dfrl, cipet, beml, rmp (rare material project), rbi note printing press and rbi paper printing press.
