mysore
Education[edit]
education[edit]
crawford hall, university of mysore
before the advent of the european system of education in mysore, agraharas (brahmin quarters) provided vedic education to hindus, and madrassas provided schooling for muslims. modern education began in mysore when a free english school was established in 1833. maharaja's college was founded in 1864. a high school exclusively for girls was established in 1881 and was later renamed maharani's women's college. the industrial school, the first institute for technical education in the city, was established in 1892; this was followed by the chamarajendra technical institute in 1913. while the modern system of education have made inroads, colleges such as the mysore sanskrit pāthaśhāla, established in 1876, still continue to provide vedic education.
the education system was enhanced by the establishment of the university of mysore in 1916. this was the sixth university to be established in india and the first in karnataka. it was named  manasagangotri ("fountainhead of the ganges of the mind") by the poet kuvempu. the university caters to the districts of mysore, mandya, hassan and chamarajanagar in karnataka. about 127 colleges, with a total of 53,000 students, are affiliated with the university. its alumni include kuvempu, gopalakrishna adiga, s. l. bhyrappa, u. r. ananthamurthy and n.r. narayana murthy. engineering education began in mysore with the establishment in 1946 of the national institute of engineering, the second oldest engineering college in the state. the mysore medical college, founded in 1924, was the first medical college to be started in karnataka and the seventh in india. national institutes in the city include te central food technological research institute, the central institute of indian languages, the defence food research laboratory, and the all india institute of speech and hearing. the city houses a campus multi-campus, multi-disciplinary private deemed university, amrita vishwa vidyapeetham.
universities[edit]
established  university  type  level  specialisation   1916  university of mysore  public  undergraduate, post-graduate, and doctoral research  multi-disciplinary   2008  jss academy of higher education & research  private   1948  national institute of engineering  private   2016  jss science and technology university  private   1996  karnataka state open university  public   2008  karnataka state music university  public  undergraduate and post-graduate  music
autonomous institutes[edit]
established  institute  type  commissioning body/affiliation  level  specialisation   1992  mahajana law college  private  affiliated to mysore university  undergraduate, llb  law   1924  mysore medical college & research institute  public  affiliated to rajiv gandhi university of health sciences  undergraduate, graduate, post-graduate, and doctoral research  medicine   1928  yuvaraja's college, mysore  public  university of mysore  basic science   1946  national institute of engineering  government-aided private  affiliated to visvesvaraya technological university  undergraduate, post-graduate  engineering   1950  central food technological research institute  public  set up by the council of scientific and industrial research  research and development  food technology   1961  defence food research laboratory  set up by the defence research and development organisation  defence and contingency food technology   1963  regional institute of education, mysore (ncert)  government  affiliated to university of mysore  undergraduate, post-graduate and research in the field of teacher education  educational training and research   1963  sri jayachamarajendra college of engineering  government-aided private  affiliated to jss science and technology university and all india council for technical education  undergraduate, graduate, post-graduate, and doctoral research  engineering and science   1966  all india institute of speech and hearing  public  commissioned by the central ministry of health and family welfare  audiology, speech, and hearing   1984  jss medical college  private  jss university  medicine   1945  sarada vilas college  private  affiliated to mysore university  undergraduate, graduate, llb, pharmacy  educational   1997  vidya vardhaka college of engineering  private  affiliated to visvesvaraya technological university  undergraduate, post graduate, research and development  engineering
