mysore
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in mysore
road[edit]
warli paintings on mysore roads
mysore is connected by national highway nh-212 to the state border town of gundlupet, where the road forks into the states of kerala and tamil nadu. state highway 17, which connects mysore to bangalore, was upgraded to a four-lane highway in 2006, reducing travel time between the two cities. a project was planned in 1994 to construct a new expressway to connect bangalore and mysore. after numerous legal hurdles, it remains unfinished as of 2012. state highway 33 and national highway 275 which connect mysore to h d kote and mangalore respectively. the karnataka state road transport corporation (ksrtc) and other private agencies operate buses both within the city and between cities. a new division of ksrtc called mysore city transport corporation (mctc) has been proposed. within the city, buses are cheap and popular means of transport, auto-rickshaws are also available and tongas (horse-drawn carriages) are popular with tourists. mysore also has a 42.5-kilometre (26.4 mi) long ring road that is being upgraded to six lanes by the muda. mysore has implemented intelligent transport system (its) to manage its city buses and ferrying commuters.
trin trin pbs[edit]
a bicycle docking station
a public bicycle sharing system, trin trin, funded partially by the united nations is popular mode of transport. it is a government project. it is the first public bike-sharing system throughout india. the key objective of trin trin is to encourage local commuters, as well as visitors, to use the bicycle in preference to motorized modes of travel and thereby help scale down the multifarious environmental and road-traffic hazards, enhance conveyance convenience, and make local daily commutes economical for the common citizen.
rail[edit]
mysore junction
mysore railway station has three lines, connecting it to bangalore, mangalore, and chamarajanagar. the first railway line established in the city was the bengalore–mysore junction metre gauge line, which was commissioned in 1882. railway lines that connect the city to chamarajanagara and mangalore are unelectrified single track and the track that connects to bengaluru is electrified double track. mysore railway junction comes under the jurisdiction of south western railway zone. within the city limits of mysore, there are two small stations in the line which connects chamarajanagara. they are ashokpuram and chamarajapuram. the fastest train to serve the city is the shatabdi express which goes to chennai via bangalore. a satellite terminal is planned at naganahalli to reduce congestion in the main railway station. on 20 june 2022, prime minister narendra modi laid the foundation to upgrade the present city railway junction with ₹385 crore, to construct another 3 platforms, 4 pit lines and 4 stabiling line to make 9 platforms in the city junction and naganahali station to built coach complex and memu hub and two more platforms to solve congestion in the city railway junction.
air[edit]
mysore airport
mysore airport is a domestic airport and is located near the village of mandakalli, 10 kilometres  10 km (6 mi) south of the centre of the city. it was built by the kings of mysore in early 1940s. mysore airport currently serves the city of mysore and is connected to multiple domestic locations including bangalore, chennai, goa, hubli, hyderabad, kochi and mangalore.  the current runway is not able to handle big flights and hence a runway expansion is about to take place expanding the runway from 1.7 km to 2.8 km and will be upgraded to international airport after the expansion. the nearest international airport is kannur international airport in kannur which lies about 168 km (104 mi) away from mysore city but considering that the only international destinations from this airport are in the middle east, bangalore airport is more commonly used to reach more destinations globally.
