nadiad
Attractions[edit]
attractions[edit]
santram mandir is located in the center of the town. it is known for its charity work. this old temple is visited by people on the day of full moon. marida darwaja and amdavadi darwaja are also nearby.
shri atmasiddhi shastra rachnabhoomi[edit]
the room where shri atmasiddhi shastra was originally composed in 1895
shri atmasiddhishastra rachnabhoomi is a beautiful memorial that stands at the sanctified site of the creation of shri atmasiddhi shastra in nadiad. this is where shri atmasiddhi shastra, a magnum opus of spirituality was composed by shrimad rajchandra, a great saint, poet and philosopher in 1895.  shrimad rajchandra composed the poetic version of the 6 fundamental truths of the soul (which he had originally penned in a letter to lallujiswami in 1893) called shri atmasiddhi shastra in simple language, which could be easily understood and memorized.
shri atmasiddhi shastra rachnabhoomi after its restoration
when shrimad rajchandra was in nadiad, ambalalbhai had remained at his service throughout the trip. once shrimadji came back from a walk around the lake (which has now been transformed into the jalmandir), he called for ambalalbhai to bring a lantern and then he started writing shri atmasiddhi shastra.
shri atmasiddhi shastra rachnabhoomi and the plaza at night
when the composition of 142 verses was finished in little over 90 minutes, it was handed over to ambalalbhai with the instructions to prepare four copies and to send them to three other people and one for himself. one was for saubhagyabhai, one for ambalalbhai, one for lallujiswami and one for maneklal ghelabhai zaveri.

shri atmasiddhi shastra rachnabhoomi has been restored by shrimad rajchandra mission dharampur using the original brick wall to preserve the holy vibrations and stay true to the era. life-sized statues of shrimadji and ambalalbhai have been placed in the room, in the same stance as when the scripture was penned. shrimad rajchandra mission dharampur also beautified the lake and consecrated a five-foot three-inch idol of shrimad rajchandra in the centre. a walking track has been constructed around the lake for the community and visitors which provides a peaceful ambience to contemplate on the self.
