nagaon
Education[edit]
education[edit]
modern education  was first introduced in the district  by christian missionaries, such as miles bronson and nathan brown in the nineteenth century. anandaram dhekial phukan, a major figure in assamese literature, spent the better part of his life in nagaon, and the assamese intellectual gunabhiram barua worked in nagaon for about two decades.
schools[edit]
the nowgong mission high school, established by miles bronson in 1846 is one of the oldest school in assam. it also has the third oldest government school in assam, the nowgong government boys' higher secondary school, established in 1865. another old school is the dawson higher secondary & multipurpose school.
prominent english medium schools:
front view of the main entrance of nowgong mission high school, the oldest school of assam
kendriya vidyalaya, nagaon christ jyoti school nowgong mission high school st. ignatius loyola english medium high school st. antony's high school little flower school model english school nagaon english academy sandipani vidyamandir st. boniface high school riverdale school
school having both english and assamese medium
ramanujan secondary school
other schools of repute:
nagaon shankardev vidya niketon national academy nagaon nowgong government boys' higher secondary school nowgong government girls' higher secondary school nagaon bengali boys' higher secondary school nagaon bengali girls' higher secondary school government urban basic school dawson higher secondary and multipurpose school om prakash jajodia girls' hindi high school marwari hindi high school navaroop jatiya vidyapith haibargaon adarsha high schooll
colleges[edit]
at present, there are about 25 colleges, of which probably the most renowned are
nowgong college a.d.p. college (named after anandaram dhekial phookan) khagarijan college (named after the old administrative headquarters of nowgong district) nowgong girls' college nowgong law college nagaon g.n.d.g. commerce college pioneer arts college college of education, nagaon
besides these there are a number of junior colleges that have sprung up in nagaon. as such many students from the neighboring districts also come to study in these colleges. some of these are
ramanujan junior college concept junior college renaissance junior college alpha beta college (jr.) kalong-kapili vidyapith junior college kalongpar vidyapith junior college bharali's academy junior college nagaon junior college srimanta sankardev junior college madhabdev junior college geetanjali junior college dronacharya junior college chanakya junior college matrix junior college dimension junior college gyanpith junior college cv raman junior college dr. s.r.k. junior college anandaram baruah junior college kamala kanta barua junior college nonoi junior college abhigyan junior college daswani classes (domain academy)
assam homeopathic medical college and hospital[edit]
the assam homeopathic college is situated in haibargaon, nagaon. the institute was established in the year 1968. it is the first homeopathic medical college of the entire north east india.
nowgong polytechnic[edit]
nowgong polytechnic
nagaon is also home to nowgong polytechnic, one of the oldest technical education institutes in assam.
nagaon also has an iti at panigaon.
the college of fisheries[edit]
the college of fisheries, the only college of its kind in the entire northeastern india, is located in raha and comes under the academic management of assam agricultural university in jorhat.
the nagaon medical college[edit]
the foundation stone of the nagaon medical college was laid by the then chief minister of assam mr. tarun gogoi in february 2016. the construction work on the same has officially begun from 18 february 2017 and the college will be ready for operation in 3 years time.
university[edit]
nagaon is home to the mahapurusha srimanta sankaradeva viswavidyalaya, which offers postgraduate and doctorate level courses.
