nagercoil
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

main article: economy of tamil nadu
the city is one among the 50 indian cities to be ranked in the world startup index of 1,000 cities. the major software companies present in nagercoil are capestart inc., hinduja global solutions, navigant consulting and american stock exchange nasdaq. the city also has small aerospace manufacturing plants and satellite fabricating firms serving the indian space research organisations facility in isro propulsion complex, mahendragiri. the regional academic centre for space by indian space research organisation, one among the only six incubation centers for space startups in india, is under construction in nagercoil. the integral coach factory has a small scale windmill unit. the export of 95 tons of fruits and vegetables to the gulf countries through the thiruvananthapuram airports is a major source of revenue for the city, with food processing companies generating a daily revenue of ₹16.7 lakh and an annual revenue of ₹6.1 billion. the flower market of thovalai exports 350 tons of flowers to kerala, europe and middle eastern countries generating an annual revenue of ₹250 crore. the major cottage industries like fish-net manufacturing, rubber industries, jewellery manufacturing are industries serving the domestic and export markets. the minor cottage industries include surgical gloves, coir-making, floral trade, handloom-weaving, cashew nut, spices, food-processing units, and lace-making (export-oriented). nagercoil has the highest per capita income of ₹2,76,454 (us$3,800), making it among the richest small cities in india.
energy[edit]

main article: wind power in india
wind farm in muppandal and aralvaimozhi region near nagercoil
the city has an installed windmill capacity of 1500 mw catering to 20% of the state's renewable electricity needs. muppandhal has emerged as the wind power hub, with plant owners eager to cash in on the ₹2.90 per unit purchase price being offered by the tamil nadu electricity board.
