nagpur
Media[edit]
media[edit]
the hitavada is the largest selling broadsheet english daily newspaper of central india. it was founded in 1911 by freedom fighter gopal krishna gokhale in nagpur. other english dailies circulated in the city include the times of india, the indian express, the economic times and marathi dailies circulated in city include nava rashtrasakal. lokmat'newspaper in nagpur,'tarun bharat, deshonatti, maharashtra times, punya nagari, lokshahi is marathi news channel in maharashtra, sakal, nagpur-news.in, nagpur today news, divya marathi and loksatta are other marathi dailies available. hindi newspapers such asnava bharat, dainik bhaskar and lokmat samachar are also circulated. employment news, which is published weekly, is also circulated in hindi, english and urdu.
all india radio is the oldest radio broadcaster in the city and has its office in the civil lines area. vividh bharati, the entertainment radio station, and gyan vani, the educational radio station, are the fm radio stations of all india radio and are available in the frequency 100.6 fm & 107.8 fm, respectively. other private fm broadcasting channels with their frequencies include radio city at 91.1 fm, red fm at 93.5 fm, my fm at 94.3 fm, radio mirchi at 98.3 fm, mirchi love fm at 91.9 fm and big fm at 92.7 fm.
television broadcasting in nagpur began on 15 august 1982 with the launch of doordarshan, the government of india's public service broadcaster. it transmits dd national and dd news, which are free-to-air terrestrial television channels and one regional satellite channel called dd sahyadri. private satellite channels started in the 1990s. lord buddha tv and awaaz india tv are free-to-air television which are based in the city and are available in various cable operators and dth platforms satellite tv channels are accessible via cable subscription, direct-broadcast satellite services or internet-based television. cable tv operators or multi system operators in the city include ucn cable network, gtpl, in cable, bcn and diamond cable network. all the dth operators in the country are available in the city viz. airtel digital tv, dd free dish, dish tv, sun direct, d2h and tata play.the city also has its own regional dth operator ucn which serves the vidarbha region of maharashtra headquartered in the city itself.
broadband internet service is available in the city and is provided by various internet service providers. wi-fi is available in major educational institutions and certain areas in the city, including government institutions under smart city plan by nsscdcl. as of 2019, 3g services in the city are provided by bsnl, airtel, vodafone idea limited, and 4g services in the city are provided by airtel, jio, vodafone idea limited and bsnl.
