nagpur
Education[edit]
education[edit]

see also: list of educational institutions in nagpur
college of agriculture, nagpur
nagpur is a major education hub in central india.
there are two types of schools in the city. nmc (government) run schools and private schools run by trusts. these schools follow the 10+2+3/4 plan (15 years of schooling leading to the first degree), the first ten years constituting school education consisting of four years primary level, three years of upper primary level and three years of high school level with a public examination at the end of tenth class and 12th class constituting the secondary and higher secondary board examination, respectively. this is followed by either a general degree course in a chosen field of study or a professional degree course, such as law, engineering and medicine. these schools are governed by either of the following boards: maharashtra state board of secondary and higher secondary education, central board for secondary education (cbse), indian certificate of secondary education (icse) and the international baccalaureate (ib).
admission to professional graduation colleges in nagpur is through mht-cet, jee (main), cat, clat, gate, cmat, gmat and neet.
nagpur has four state universities: rashtrasant tukadoji maharaj nagpur university (founded in 1923 as nagpur university, one of the oldest in the country and having more than 600 affiliated colleges), maharashtra animal and fishery sciences university, kavikulaguru kalidas sanskrit university and maharashtra national law university.
hislop college established in 1883 is one of the oldest college in nagpur, named after scottish missionary stephen hislop (1817–1863), who was a noted evangelist, educationist and geologist. vasantrao naik government institute of arts and social sciences (established in 1885 as morris college) is an old college in the city. college of agriculture is another old college in the city, founded in 1906 by the then british government. it is one of the first five agriculture colleges in the country.
nagpur has four government medical colleges: government medical college, indira gandhi government medical college, nagpur, government dental college and government ayurvedic college, and also a private mbbs institute, n. k. p. salve institute of medical sciences and research center. medical colleges in the city are affiliated to maharashtra university of health sciences. all india institute of medical sciences has been established in 2018 and it has started its classes from gmch campus temporarily until its own campus gets constructed.
vnit nagpur
rstm nagpur university campus
most engineering colleges in the city are affiliated with rashtrasant tukadoji maharaj nagpur university. laxminarayan institute of technology (established 1942) is a chemical engineering and technology institute located in nagpur and managed directly by rashtrasant tukadoji maharaj nagpur university. government polytechnic, nagpur (established 1914) is one of the oldest polytechnic in india. visvesvaraya national institute of technology, located in the city, is the only nit in maharashtra. indian institute of information technology has been established as a ppp with tcs and ceinsys (erstwhile adcc infocad) as industry partners in 2016. other prominent engineering colleges in the city include g. h. raisoni college of engineering nagpur, shri ramdeobaba college of engineering and management, kavikulguru institute of technology and science, kdk college of engineering, yeshwantrao chavan college of engineering and government college of engineering, cummins college of engineering for women, nagpur.
nagpur has two major management institutes, indian institute of management established in 2015 and institute of management technology, private management college, established in 2004. iim, nagpur initially started batches at vnit campus since the construction of the iim building was ongoing at mihan. former president ramnath kovind inaugurated the permanent campus of iim nagpur on 8 may 2022. symbiosis international university has its campus in the city which contains two of its institute namely symbiosis institute of business management and symbiosis law school. g.s. college of commerce and economics, established in 1945, is the first commerce institute in the region to get autonomous status.
nagpur also has other centrally funded institutes like national power training institute, central institute for cotton research, central institute of mining and fuel research, central power research institute, national academy of direct taxes, national civil defence college, national research centre for citrus, petroleum and explosives safety organisation, and national environmental engineering research institute.
government chitrakala mahavidyalaya is also a premier institute in the city. nagpur also has an ignou and ycmou regional centre.
