nagpur
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
cultural events and literature[edit]
the city contains people from other indian states as well as people belonging to the world's major faiths, and yet is known for staying calm during communal conflicts in india. nagpur plays host to cultural events throughout the year. cultural and literary societies in nagpur include vidarbha sahitya sangh (for development of marathi), vidarbha rashtrabhasha prachar samiti (promotion and spreading hindi) and vidarbha hindi sahitya sammelan (for promoting hindi). marathi sahitya sammelan, the conference on marathi literature were held twice in nagpur city. nagpur also hosts the annual orange city literature festival since 2019 and vidarbha literary fest since 2020, featuring local and international authors. nagpur is the head office of aadim samvidhan sanrakshan samiti (working for the rights of scheduled tribes).
the south-central zone cultural centre also sponsors cultural events in nagpur city, such as the orange city craft mela and folk dance festival, vidarbha which is noted for its numerous folk-dances such as the human tiger. newspapers are published from nagpur in marathi, english and hindi. in addition, the government of maharashtra organises a week-long kalidas festival, a series of music and dance performances, by national level artists. nagpur municipal corporation in partnership with maharashtra tourism development corporation organises nagpur mohotsav at yeshwant stadium, in which many distinguish artists participate.  the nagpur municipal corporation also organises the orange city international film festival (ociff) annually, in association with saptak, pune film foundation, vidarbha sahitya sangh, and rashtrasant tukadoji maharaj nagpur university (rtmnu).
the nagpur central museum (est. 1863) maintains collections are mainly for vidarbha region. three brothers ghulam ali (kotwal), mohammad saaduddin (subedar) and mohammad saladuddin (minister and kotwal) from jhajjar are remembered as great scholars of urdu and persian during the reign of maharaja senasaheb subha chhatrapati raghuji bapusaheb bhonsle iii. they founded 'jhajjar bagh' at hansapuri (now mominpura). in this location, they built their residence 'aina-e mahal', a well and a masjid (now masjid ahle hadith). 'jhajjar bagh' also known as 'subedar ka bada' was located where nowadays mohammad ali road at mominpura, jamia masjid, mohammad ali sarai and furqania madrasa are located.
the state government has approved a new safari park of international standards besides gorewada lake. in 2013 nmc erected the gigantic namantar shahid smarak in memory of namantar andolan martyrs.
the orange city lgbtq pride march is also held annually in nagpur, along with the nagpur lgbt queer carnival during the pride month
religious places and festivals[edit]
deeksha bhoomi
deekshabhoomi, the largest hollow stupa or the largest dome shaped monument and an important place of the buddhist movement is,  located in nagpur. every year on the day of vijayadashami, i.e. dussehra, followers of ambedkar visit deekshabhoomi to mark the conversion ceremony of ambedkar and his followers in nagpur into buddhism that took place on 14 october 1956. it has been given 'a' grade tourist place status by maharashtra government in march 2016. 14 april, which is the birthdate of ambedkar, is celebrated as ambedkar jayanti.
jainism has a good presence in nagpur. there are nearly 30 jain temples. the old ones are sengan jain temple ladpura, parwarpura jain temple, kirana oli jain temple, and juna oli jain temple. in west nagpur shri 1008 shantinath digamber bhagwan temple is situated.
shri ganesh
the most famous temple in nagpur is tekdi ganesh mandir, and is said to be one of the swayambhu ("self-manifested") temples in the city. sri poddareshwar ram mandir and shri mahalaxmi devi temple of koradi are important hindu temples.
religious events are observed in the city throughout the year. ram navami is celebrated in nagpur with shobha yatra with a procession of floats depicting events from the ramayana. processions are also held on important festivals of other religions such as dhamma chakra pravartan din, vijayadashami, eid e milad, guru nanak jayanti, mahavir jayanti, durga puja, ganesh chaturthi and moharram. like the rest of india, nagpurkars celebrate major hindu festivals like diwali, holi and dussera with enthusiasm. celebrations lasting for several days are held on ganesh chaturthi and durga puja festivals in virtually every small locality in the city.
dargah baba tajuddin
the city also contains a sizeable muslim population, and famous places of worship for muslims include the jama masjid-mominpura and bohri jamatkhana-itwari. the most famous shrine (dargah) of tajuddin muhammad badruddin is at tajabad. annual urs is celebrated in great enthusiasm and unity on 26th of muharram. nagpur is also called as tajpur as the holy shirine of sufi saint baba tajuddin.
the st. francis de sales cathedral is located in sadar as well as the all saints cathedral church. there are many south indian temples in nagpur like sarveshwara devalayam, where all south indian festivals are celebrated like sitarama kalyanam, radha kalyanam dhanurmasa celebration with andal kalyanam, balaji temple in seminary hills where every year bramhotsavam to lord balaji and lord kartikeya is celebrated here. there are 2 ayyapa temples, one at ayyapa nagar and the other at harihara nagar, raghvendraswami mutt, murugananda swami temple at mohan nagar, nimishamba devi temple subramanyiam devastanam at sitabuldi and many more such south indian temples are here in nagpur as there is quite a good populations of south indians in nagpur.
seminary hill of nagpur
marbat festival is a unique festival for nagpur and is organised every year a day after the bullock festival of 'pola'. the tradition of taking out the marbat processions of 'kali' (black) and 'pivli' (yellow) marbats (idols), started in 1880 in the eastern part of the city. a number of 'badgyas' (mascots), representing contemporary symbols of evil, comprise another feature of the annual processions. this festival dates back to the 19th century when the bhonsla dynasty ruled.
there is a parsi zoroastrian agiary (dar-e-meher) in nagpur, where the parsi new year is celebrated by the parsi community in nagpur.
arts and crafts[edit]
the tradition of painting in nagpur was patronised by the royal house of the bhonsales as well as common people. illustrated manuscripts, including of the bhagavat, jnaaneshwari, shakuntala, and geeta, and the folk patachitras related to some festivals are available besides murals. the community of artists was called chitaris (painters), and this community has today turned to sculpt.
textile was once an important industry in nagpur. good quality cotton was produced in abundant quantities thanks to a suitable soil and climate. with the introduction of the railways, cotton sales and goods transport flourished. besides cotton textiles, silk and wool weaving was also practised in the district. silk sarees and pagota, patka, dhoti, and borders were woven with the silk thread.
cuisine[edit]

see also: haldiram's
kadhi-traditional dish of nagpur
the vidharbha region has its own distinctive cuisine known as the varhadi cuisine or saoji cuisine. saoji or savji cuisine was the main cuisine of the savji community. this traditional food is famous for its spicy taste. the special spices used in the gravy include black pepper, dry coriander, bay leaves, grey cardamom, cinnamon, cloves, and ample use of poppy seeds. non-vegetarian food especially chicken and mutton are commonly eaten in saoji establishments in nagpur. there are numerous savji bhojanalays in nagpur which are so popular in maharashtra that the renowned indian chef sanjeev kapoor once featured savji mutton on one of his tv shows and the recipe is listed on his website. nagpur is also famous for its oranges, which have some typical qualities have recently begun to attract international attention. numerous beverages are made out of the oranges. santra barfi is also a famous dish, arising from orange which is produced locally in nagpur. mominpura is a majority muslim area of the city and it is famous for its mughal dishes and biryani. the city is also famous for rare black chickens called kadaknath chicken which are cooked in varhadi style.
nagpur is also famous for tarri poha, a variety of flattened rice, and has many food joints; each having their own way of preparing and serving it. samosas are also famous in nagpur and is available at many restaurants and food spots. another famous food is patodi and kadhi.
