nagpur
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of nagpur

see also: nagpur state
etymology[edit]
nag river
nagpur is named after the great river nag which flows through the city. the old nagpur city (today called 'mahal') is situated on north banks of the river nag. the suffix pur means "city" in many indian languages.
one of the earlier names of nagpur was "fanindrapura". it derives its origin from the marathi word fana (फण; meaning hood of a cobra). nagpur's first newspaper was named fanindramani, which means a jewel that is believed to be suspended over a cobra's hood. it is this jewel that lights up the darkness, hence the name of the newspaper. b. r. ambedkar claimed that both the city and the river are named after the 'nags' who were opponents of the indo-aryans. during british rule, the name of the city was spelt and pronounced as "nagpore".
early and medieval history[edit]
statue of bakht buland shah in nagpur
human existence around present-day nagpur can be traced back 3000 years to the 8th century bce. mehir burial sites at the drugdhamna (near the mhada colony) indicate that the megalithic culture existed around nagpur and is still followed. the first reference to the name "nagpur" is found in a 10th-century copper-plate inscription discovered at devali in the neighbouring wardha district. the inscription is a record of grant of a village situated in the visaya (district) of nagpura-nandivardhana during the time of the rastrakuta king krsna iii in the saka year 862 (940 ce).
towards the end of the 3rd century, king vindhyasakti is known to have ruled the nagpur region. in the 4th century, the vakataka dynasty ruled over the nagpur region and surrounding areas and had good relations with the gupta empire. the vakataka king prithvisena i moved his capital to nagardhan (ancient name nandivardhana), 38 km (24 mi) from nagpur. after the vakatakas, the region came under the rule of the hindu kingdoms of the badami chalukyas, the rashtrakutas. the paramaras or panwars of malwa appear to have controlled the nagpur region in the 11th century. a prashasti inscription of the paramara king lakshmadeva (r. c. 1086–1094) has been found at nagpur. subsequently, the region came under the yadavas of devagiri. in 1296, allauddin khilji invaded the yadava kingdom after capturing deogiri, after which the tughlaq dynasty came to power in 1317.
in the 17th century, the mughal empire conquered the region, however during mughal era, regional administration was carried out by the gond kingdom of deogarh in the chhindwara district of the modern-day state of madhya pradesh. in the 18th century, bhonsles of the maratha empire established the nagpur kingdom based in the city.
modern history[edit]
main entrance of the nagardhan fort, commissioned by raghuji bhonsle of the bhonsale dynasty of the maratha empire in the 18th century
the king who actually founded nagpur was bakht buland shah of deogarh. an able administrator, he incentivised large-scale immigration of marathi hindu cultivators to increase economic activity. after bhakt buland shah, the next raja of deogarh was chand sultan, who resided principally in the country below the hills, fixing his capital at nagpur, which he turned into a walled town. on chand sultan's death in 1739, wali shah, an illegitimate son of bakht buland, usurped the throne and chand sultan's widow invoked the aid of the maratha leader raghoji bhosale of berar in the interest of her sons akbar shah and burhan shah. the usurper was put to death and the rightful heirs placed on the throne. after 1743, a series of maratha rulers came to power, starting with raghoji bhosale, who conquered the territories of deogarh, chanda and chhattisgarh by 1751.
nagpur was burnt substantially in 1765 and again partially in 1811 by marauding pindaris. however, the development of the city of nagpur continued. in 1803 raghoji ii bhosale joined the peshwa against the british in the second anglo-maratha war, but the british prevailed. after raghoji ii's death in 1816, his son parsaji was deposed and murdered by mudhoji ii bhosale. despite the fact that he had entered into a treaty with the british in the same year, mudhoji joined the peshwa in the third anglo-maratha war in 1817 against the british but suffered a defeat at sitabuldi in present-day nagpur. the fierce battle was a turning point as it laid the foundations of the downfall of the bhosales and paved the way for the british acquisition of nagpur city. mudhoji was deposed after a temporary restoration to the throne, after which the british placed raghoji iii bhosale, the grandchild of raghoji ii, on the throne. during the rule of raghoji iii (which lasted until 1840), the region was administered by a british resident. in 1853, the british took control of nagpur after raghoji iii died without leaving an heir.
map of nagpur district with major towns and rivers
central provinces and berar, 1903. princely states are shown in yellow.
from 1853 to 1861, the nagpur province (which consisted of the present nagpur region, chhindwara, and chhattisgarh) became part of the central provinces and berar and came under the administration of a commissioner under the british central government, with nagpur as its capital. berar was added in 1903. the advent of the great indian peninsula railway (gip) in 1867 spurred its development as a trade centre. tata group started its first textile mill at nagpur, formally known as central india spinning and weaving company ltd. the company was popularly known as "empress mills" as it was inaugurated on 1 january 1877, the day queen victoria was proclaimed empress of india.
the non-co-operation movement was launched in the nagpur session of 1920. the city witnessed a hindu–muslim riot in 1923 which had profound impact on k. b. hedgewar, who in 1925 founded the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh (rss), a hindu nationalist organisation in mohitewada mahal, nagpur with an idea of creating a hindu nation. after the 1927 nagpur riots rss gained further popularity in nagpur and the organisation grew nationwide.
after indian independence[edit]
after india gained independence in 1947, central provinces and berar became a province of india. in 1950, the central provinces and berar was reorganised as the indian state of madhya pradesh with nagpur as its capital. when the indian states were reorganised along the linguistic lines in 1956, nagpur and berar regions were transferred to the state of bombay, which was split into the states of maharashtra and gujarat in 1960. at a formal public ceremony held on 14 october 1956 in nagpur, b. r. ambedkar and his supporters converted to buddhism, which started the dalit buddhist movement that is still active. in 1994, the city of nagpur witnessed its most violent day in modern times: in the gowari stampede, police fired on gowari protestors demanding scheduled tribe status and caused a mass panic.
nagpur completed 300 years of establishment in the year 2002. a big celebration was organised to mark the event.
