nagpur
Sports[edit]
sports[edit]

see also: vidarbha cricket team
vidarbha cricket association stadium, nagpur
nagpur is a big center for cricket in vidarbha owing to the presence of the vidarbha cricket association. vidarbha cricket association (vca) is the governing body of cricket activities in the vidarbha region in maharashtra. it is affiliated to the board of control for cricket in india. nagpur is one of the few indian cities that has more than one international cricket stadium, the older one being the vidarbha cricket association ground situated in civil lines, and the new one, the vidarbha cricket association stadium, inaugurated in 2008 is situated in jamtha, wardha road on the outskirts of the city.
vidarbha cricket association stadium has been built on wardha road with a seating capacity of 45,000 people at a cost of ₹75 crore (us$9.4 million). it is one of the fifteen test cricket venues in the country. vidarbha cricket association ground has been the venue for the 1987 reliance world cup and 1996 wills world cup. vidarbha cricket association stadium has been the venue for the 2011 cricket world cup and 2016 icc world twenty20. the stadium also hosts certain matches of the indian premier league and had been the home city for the now defunct deccan chargers in the 2010 season and was also the home city for kings xi punjab along with mohali in the 2016 season. vidarbha cricket association also has a cricket academy at the main centre in vidarbha cricket association ground and three more centres. it also has its own cricket teams which play in various formats as mandated by bcci. the vidarbha cricket team had won the ranji trophy and irani cup consecutively in 2017-18 and 2018-19 season.
a view at npl starting ceremony
vidarbha hockey association is a body governing field hockey in the vidarbha region and is affiliated to hockey india as an associate member. vidarbha hockey association stadium is the hockey ground owned and managed by vidarbha hockey association.
nagpur district football association(ndfa) is the district governing body for football in nagpur, maharashtra and is affiliated with the western india football association, the state sports governing body. the nagpur district football association is a district level football body and conducts various matches among the schools and clubs. it has its own league. ndfa elite division champions league, another football tournament, was held at nagpur annually since 2010 until 2014 by lokmat group in yeshwant stadium.   indian friends football club(iffc), rabbani, rahul club and young muslim football club (ymfc) are renowned football clubs in the city. other clubs include, rabbani club, rahul club, city police, south east central railway, qidwai club, srpf, new globe and city club. nagpur fc has its own football academy in dhanwate national college, congress nagar. slum soccer is a social initiative started by vijay barse for young runaways and former drug addicts to rehabilitate them through football.
badminton tournaments in the city are organised by nagpur district badminton association (ndba) which is affiliated to maharashtra badminton association which in turn is a member of badminton association of india. nagpur district table tennis association organises table tennis tournaments at district level and is affiliated to maharashtra table tennis association. the city also has a divisional sports complex which consist of indoor stadium and other gymnastic facilities.
the city's major indoor arena is vivekananda nagar indoor sports complex located near mankapur.  the arena hosts several political events, concerts and sports events like badminton, basketball, lawn tennis.
the city also has various running events, for general public, organised by various institutions.
