nagpur
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]
schematic tourist map of nagpur city
tiger reserves[edit]
scenic beauty of tadoba andhari tiger reserve
scenic beauty of pench tiger reserve
nagpur is surrounded by many tiger reserves and acts as a gateway, hence called tiger capital of india. tiger reserves such as pench tiger reserve is situated around 100 km from the city and can be reached through nh44 in nagpur jabalpur road. tadoba national park is situated south of the city and is around 141 km from the city. umred karhandla wildlife sanctuary, bor wildlife sanctuary, navegaon national park, melghat tiger reserve and kanha tiger reserve are the other tiger reserves which are located at a radius of 200 km from the city. the city has its own reserved forest area at seminary hills and gorewada.
zoos, gardens and lakes[edit]
maharajbagh zoo is an existing zoo which is located in the heart of the city near sitabuldi and consists of a variety of animals. the zoo is going through fund crunches and does not have a proper plan for which the central zoo authority had derecognised the zoo in november 2018. its recognition has since been extended under the directions from moefcc. gorewada zoo is an upcoming international zoo project which is being set up beside gorewada lake it is being jointly developed by forest development corporation of maharashtra and essel group.
the city consist of various natural and man made lakes. khindsi lake, ambazari lake and gorewada lake are the natural lakes of the city while futala lake, shukrawari lake, sakkardara lake, zilpi lake and sonegaon lake are the man made lakes. futala lake is being redeveloped and the world'd second largest lighting and musical fountain is constructed in the lake. it will be available for a public show on tickets. the city also has various gardens which consist of ambazari garden, telankhedi garden, satpuda botanical garden, japanese garden and children's traffic park.
divyang park[edit]
virendra kumar, union minister of social justice and empowerment 26 august 2022 announced that the central government with the help of the state government will create maharashtra's first ever "divyang park" and the procedure in this endeavor has started. this park will be peculiar and will have different types of facilities for divyangjans such as textiles pathways, smell, and touch gardens, sensory gardens, skill training facilities, sports, rehabilitation facilities, and infotainment.
religious places[edit]
nagpur boasts many religious structures that hold importance for differing religious beliefs. deekshabhoomi and dragon palace are important religious places for buddhists across india and the world. deekshabhoomi is the place where b. r. ambedkar with millions of his followers embraced buddhism in the year 1956. dragon palace temple is situated at kamptee which is around 15 km (9.3 mi) from the city. it also has a state of the art vipassana centre which was inaugurated by president of india ram nath kovind on 22 september 2017. other prominent religious structures include ramtek fort temple at ramtek which is a temple built inside a fort and is 55 km (34 mi) away from nagpur, adasa ganpati temple located near savner is one of the eight ashta vinayaks in vidarbha, baba tajjuddin dargah, shri shantinath digambar jain mandir at ramtek, shree ganesh mandir tekdi, located near nagpur railway station and one of the swayambhu temple of lord ganesha, sai baba mandir at wardha road, telankhedi hanuman temple, swaminarayan temple, koradi temple, located at koradi, shri poddareshwar ram temple, balaji temple, all saints cathedral and gurudwara guru nanak darbar.
museums[edit]
nagpur central museum
the city also has some museums which are nagpur central museum and narrow gauge rail museum. raman science centre is a premium science centre of central india, that has of late become a must see feature on the city's tourist landscape with many scientific experimental edutainment installations which also has a planetarium and a unique facility called the science on a sphere inside. amusement parks such as fun n food village, high land park, fun planet and dwarka river farms and amusement park are located in the city.
