nagpur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
nagpur is an emerging metropolis. nagpur's nominal gdp was estimated to be around ₹ 1,406,860 million in 2019–20, making it the largest economic center in entire central india. nagpur district has a per-capita gdp of ₹ 270,617 as of 2019-20 financial year, being the highest in the central india in 2004, it was ranked the fastest-growing city in india in terms of the number of households with an annual income of ₹10 million or more. nagpur has been the main centre of commerce in the region of vidarbha since its early days and is an important trading location. although, nagpur's economic importance gradually declined relative to mumbai and pune after the merging of vidarbha into maharashtra because of a period of neglect by the state government, the city's economy later recovered.
sitabuldi market, one of the busiest commercial areas of nagpur
nagpur branch of the reserve bank of india
the city is important for the banking sector as it hosts the regional office of reserve bank of india, which was opened on 10 september 1956. the reserve bank of india has two branches in nagpur, one of which houses india's entire gold assets. sitabuldi market in central nagpur, known as the heart of the city, is the major commercial market area.
nagpur is home to ice-cream manufacturer dinshaws, indian dry food manufacturer haldiram's, indian ready-to-cook food manufacturer actchawa, spice manufacturer suruchi international, ayurvedic products company vicco and baidyanath. and explosives & ammunition company solar industries.
for centuries, nagpur has been famous for its orange gardens in the country, hence the name "orange city". orange cultivation has been expanding and it is the biggest marketplace for oranges in the country. the maharashtra agro industrial development corporation has its multi fruit processing division called nagpur orange grower's association (noga) which has an installed capacity of 4,950 mt of fruits per annum. orange is also exported to various regions in the country as well to other countries. nagpur is also famous for the cotton and silk which is woven by its large koshti population of handloom weavers which are around 5,000.
nagpur and the vidarbha region have a very prominent power sector as compared to the rest of maharashtra. koradi thermal power station and khaparkheda thermal power station are two major thermal power stations located near nagpur and operated by mspgcl. ntpc has a super thermal power plant called mauda super thermal power station in mauda around 40 km from nagpur and vidarbha industries power limited (a subsidiary of reliance power) is situated at butibori
tcs campus in mihan nagpur
the multi-modal international hub airport at nagpur (mihan) is an ongoing project for the dr. babasaheb ambedkar international airport, nagpur. the government of maharashtra formed a special purpose entity, maharashtra airport development company, for the development of mihan.
persistent campus at it park, parsodi
prominent information technology companies such as tcs, tech mahindra, hcl, globallogic, persistent systems, infosys and hexaware are located at various it parks in nagpur . tata advanced systems, erstwhile tal manufacturing solutions, has its facility in the sez for manufacturing structural components for boeing and airbus. air india engineering services limited and aar-indamer have their mro facility in the sez. dassault reliance aerospace limited (dral) and thales reliance defence system also have their manufacturing facilities in mihan. pharmaceutical company lupin also has its facility in the sez.
apart from mihan sez the city has three prominent midc areas nearby. the butibori industrial area is one of the largest in asia in terms of area. the estate's largest unit is indo rama synthetics, which manufactures synthetic polyester yarn. other units in butibori include the power transmission company gammon india limited (t & d), gammon india ltd. (infra), kec, calderys india, unitech power transmissions limited, acc nihon castings ltd and electrolux. ceat tyres has its tyre manufacturing plant in butibori the hingna industrial estate on the western fringes of the city is made up of around 900 small and medium industrial units. the major ones among them are the tractor manufacturing plant of mahindra and mahindra, casting units of neco ltd., candico), bharat containers making aluminium aerosol cans pix transmissions, and sanvijay rolling & engineering ltd. (srel). kalmeshwar midc has 164 industrial plots. jsw steel, ktm textile, esab india ltd, zim pharma ltd, metlok pvt. ltd., unijuels life sciences, chemfield pharmaceuticals private ltd., minex injection product private ltd., minex metallurgical co.ltd. and porohit textile are a few big names.
owing to rich natural resources in the region, mining is a major activity. several government organisations related to the mining industry are based in nagpur, which includes western coalfields limited (one of the eight fully owned subsidiaries of coal india limited), moil and indian bureau of mines.
