nagpur
Administration[edit]
administration[edit]
vidhan bhavan (state legislative assembly) nagpur
nagpur was the capital of central provinces and berar for 100 years. after the state reorganisation in 1956, nagpur and vidarbha region become part of the new maharashtra state. with this nagpur lost the capital status and hence a pact was signed between leaders, the nagpur pact. according to the pact, one session of state legislature and the state legislative council takes place in vidhan bhavan, nagpur.usually the winter session takes place in the city exception being in 1966, 1971 and 2018 when the monsoon session took place in the city.  nagpur has a district court and its own bench of the bombay high court which was established on 9 january 1936. the city consists of six vidhan sabha constituencies namely nagpur west, nagpur south, nagpur south west, nagpur east, nagpur north and nagpur central. these constituencies are part of the nagpur lok sabha constituency.
local government[edit]

see also: greater nagpur metropolitan area and list of localities in nagpur
nit- nagpur improvement trust
the municipal council for nagpur was established in 1864. at that time, the area under the jurisdiction of the nagpur municipal council was 15.5 km and the population was 82,000. the duties entrusted to the nagpur municipal council were to maintain cleanliness and arrange for street lights and water supply with government assistance. the municipal corporation came into existence in march 1951. nagpur is administered by the nagpur municipal corporation (nmc), which is a democratically elected civic governing body. the corporation elects a mayor who along with a deputy mayor heads the organisation. the mayor carries out the activities through various committees such as the standing committee, health and sanitation committee, education committee, water works, public works, public health and market committee. since january 2021, the mayor of nagpur is dayashankar tiwari, the administrative head of the corporation is the municipal commissioner, an indian administrative service (ias) officer appointed by the state government. the municipal commissioner along with the deputy municipal commissioners, carry out various activities related to engineering, health and sanitation, taxation and its recovery. various departments such as public relations, library, health, finance, buildings, slums, roads, street lighting, traffic, establishment, gardens, public works, local audit, legal services, waterworks, education, octroi and fire services manage their specific activities. the activities of nmc are administered by its zonal offices. there are 10 zonal offices in nagpur – laxmi nagar, dharampeth, hanuman nagar, dhantoli, nehru nagar, gandhi baugh, sataranjipura, lakkadganj, ashi nagar and mangalwari. these zones are divided into 145 wards. each ward is represented by a corporator, a majority of whom are elected in local elections. nmc has various departments including healthcare, education, and a fire brigade dedicated for each service and project of the city.
nagpur improvement trust (nit) is a local planning authority which works with the nmc and carries out the development of the civic infrastructure and new urban areas on its behalf. nit is headed by a chairman, an indian administrative service officer appointed by the state government.  since the 1990s the urban agglomeration had rapidly expanded beyond the city's municipal boundaries. this growth had presented challenges for the future growth of the city and its fringes in an organised manner. with a view of achieving balanced development within the region, the nagpur improvement trust (nit) was notified as the special planning authority (spa) for the nagpur metropolitan area (nma) and entrusted with the preparation of a statutory development plan as per provisions of the mrtp act, 1966. the notified nma comprises areas outside the nagpur city and includes 721 villages under 9 tehsils of the nagpur district spreading across an area of 3,567 km. in 1999, the government of maharashtra declared that the nagpur metropolitan area shall comprise all of nagpur city, nagpur gramin (rural areas near nagpur), hingna, parseoni, mauda and kamptee taluka and parts of savner, kalmeshwar, umred and kuhi. the boundaries of the "metro region" around the municipal corporation limits of the city have been defined as per the notification. in 2002, the government extended the jurisdiction of the nagpur improvement trust (nit) by 25 to 40 kilometres. this new area was defined under clause 1(2) of nit act-1936 as "nagpur metropolitan area". maharashtra state cabinet in 2016 had paved the way for nit to become nagpur metropolitan region development authority (nmrda) nmrda was notified by the government of maharashtra in march 2017. nmrda has been made on the lines of mumbai metropolitan region development authority. nmrda has been mandated to monitor development in the metropolis comprising 721 villages across nine tehsils in the district. the body is headed by metropolitan commissioner, an indian administrative service officer appointed by the state government as was with the nit chairman. currently, nit is the planning authority for developing projects around the city in land owned by it.
the maharashtra government had appointed larsen & toubro (l&t) as the implementation partner to convert nagpur into the country's first large scale, integrated, smart city. the state government had also decided to develop the city complete with five hubs, from textile centres to defence sector. nagpur was selected from maharashtra among other cities under government of india's smart cities mission. city was selected in the third round of selection. for the implementation of the projects under smart cities mission a special purpose vehicle was formed which was named nagpur smart and sustainable city development corporation ltd.
nagpur police is headed by a police commissioner who is of the rank of additional director general of police of maharashtra police. nagpur police is divided into 5 zones, each headed by a deputy commissioner of police, while traffic zones are divided into eight zones each headed by an inspector. the state c.i.d regional headquarter are situated in nagpur. along with state reserve police force campus
utility services[edit]
originally, all the utility services of the city were carried out by nmc departments, but from 2008 onwards privatisation had started for major utility services. the orange city water private limited (ocw), a joint venture of veolia water india pvt. ltd and vishwaraj infrastructure ltd., manages the water supply for the city as well as nagpur municipal corporation's water treatment plants at gorewada, all the elevated service reservoirs, ground service reservoirs, master balancing reservoirs commonly known as water tanks. this joint venture was established in november 2011 and was awarded the contract to execute 24x7 water supply project and operational and maintenance of waterworks for 25 years. kanak resources management ltd. was awarded the contract for garbage collection in the city as per nagpur bin free project in 2009 by nmc. it was replaced by ag enviro infra project pvt ltd and bvg india in 2019. in electricity supply, which was first managed by mseb was then replaced by msedcl. after some years the distribution franchisee system was introduced to reduce the losses in the divisions and so spanco nagpur discom ltd.(sndl) was awarded the distribution franchisee for 15 years to manage three of the four divisions from nagpur urban circle namely, civil lines, mahal and gandhibagh on 23 february 2011 by msedcl. the power distribution and maintenance for the fourth division i.e. congress nagar division was still managed by msedcl. as sndl mounted losses it intimated msedcl to takeover the franchises as it was unable to maintain the franchisee areas under it. msedcl thus took over all the nagpur urban circle areas as in september 2019. nagpur fire brigade has nine fire stations at various locations in the city. india post which is a governmental postal department has two head post offices and many post offices and sub-post offices at various locations in the city and are part of the logistics services in the city along with various other private operators.
health care[edit]
government medical college and hospital, nagpur

see also: list of hospitals in nagpur
nmc in collaboration with central government, state government, unicef, world health organization and non-governmental organisation conducts and maintains various health schemes in the city. city health line is an initiative started by nmc dedicated to the health of citizens of nagpur. this includes providing computerised comparative information and action in the field to local citizens. nmc runs three indoor patient hospitals including indira gandhi rugnalaya at lad square, panchpaoli maternity hospital in panchpaoli and isolation hospital in immamwada. besides, the civic body runs three big diagnostic centres at mahal, sadar and also at indira gandhi rugnalaya. apart from these, nmc has 57 outpatient dispensaries (opds), including 23 health posts sanctioned under union government's schemes, 15 allopathy hospitals, 12 ayurvedic hospitals, three homoeopathy hospitals, three naturopathy hospitals and one unani hospital. in 2013, abp news-ipsos declared nagpur the country's best city for health care services. the city is home to numerous hospitals, some run by the government and some private and consists of various super-specialty and multi-specialty ones. recently various cancer speciality hospitals providing treatment until tertiary care for cancer patients have been established in the city making it a natural medical hub for nearby areas and boosting healthcare system in the city. nagpur is a health hub for central india and caters to a large geographical area arbitrarily bounded by delhi in the north, kolkata in the east, mumbai-pune in the west and hyderabad in the south. people from madhya pradesh, chhattisgarh, uttar pradesh, orissa, andhra pradesh and telangana regularly come to nagpur for their health needs. nagpur boasts of super-specialty physicians and surgeons serving its population in both public sector government-run hospitals and well equipped private hospitals catering to all strata of society. aiims has also been established in mihan, nagpur.
according to 2005 national family health survey, nagpur has a fertility rate of 1.9 which is below the replacement level. the infant mortality rate was 43 per 1,000 live births, and the mortality rate for children under five was 50 per 1,000 live births.  about 57% slum and 72% non-slum children have received all the mandatory vaccines which include bcg, measles and full courses of polio and dpt.  in nagpur, 78 percent of poor children are anaemic, including 49 percent who have moderate to severe anaemia. about 45% of children under five years of age and 31% of women are underweight. the poor people from the city mostly cite the reason of the lack of a nearby facility, poor quality of care and excessive waiting time for not visiting any government hospitals for treatment. according to the national family health survey (nfhs-4) of 2015-16 for nagpur, households having improved drinking water source is 95.3%, households having improved sanitation facility is 77.3% and households having clean fuel for cooking is 87.6%. health insurance coverage among households in the city are 19.5%. female sterilisation is more prominent than male sterilisation in nagpur. institutional births in the city is 97%. children below 5 years who are anaemic are 43.50%, while women and men in the age group of 15 to 49 years who are anaemic are 45.00% and 21.20%, respectively.
military establishments[edit]
sitabuldi fort is home to indian army's 118th infantry battalion.
nagpur is an important city for the indian armed forces. maintenance command of indian air force has its current headquarters at vayusena nagar in nagpur. it houses mi-8 helicopters and the iaf carriers il-76 and handles the maintenance, repair, and operations of all aircraft, helicopters and other equipment.
the ordnance factory and staff college of ordnance factory ambajhari and national academy of defence production for group a officer of ordnance factories are in the western part of the city. sitabuldi fort is managed by the uttar maharashtra and gujarat sub area hq.of the indian army and citizens are allowed to visit the premises on republic day, maharashtra day and independence day.
the 'raison d'être' for kamptee, the military cantonment, is still operational. kamptee cantonment houses the officers training academy for national cadets corps, which is the only one of its kind. it is also the regimental centre of one of the oldest and most respected regiments in the indian army, the brigade of the guards. guards, located at kamptee, are the only regiment in the indian army which have won two pvc (param veer chakra), the highest gallantry awarded to soldiers for wartime operations. there are also other military establishments and a well equipped military hospital to care for the health of the armed forces personnel. the army postal service centre is also operational in the cantonment since 1948, to provide training to personnel of department of post who volunteer themselves for the army. nagpur's national civil defence college provides civil defence and disaster management training to pupils from all over india and abroad. indian air force's il-76 transport planes nicknamed "gajraj" are also based in nagpur.
