nagpur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in nagpur
nagpur junction railway station building
rail[edit]
railways started in nagpur way back in 1867 when portion of bombay-bhusaval-nagpur line was opened for traffic and train service from nagpur to calcutta was started in 1881. today, a total of 254 trains stop at nagpur railway station. these include passenger, express, mail, duronto, rajdhani, garib rath trains. of these 65 are daily trains and 22 terminate/originate from nagpur. almost 1.6 lakh passengers board/leave nagpur railway station nagpur railway station, one of the oldest and busiest stations of india was inaugurated in its present from on 15 january 1925 by the then governor sir frank. apart from the nagpur railway station, ajni railway station and itwari railway station are the important stations of the city. other railway stations in the city include ajni, motibagh, kalamna, itwari and godhani. nagpur-ajni rail route which is just three km (1.9 mi) long, is the shortest train run in indian railways primarily meant for crew to travel from nagpur station to the workshop at ajni.
the city is the divisional headquarters for the central railway and south east central railway zone of indian railways. nagpur is a city with two divisional headquarters, a rare distinction it shares with lucknow, which has headquarters for two different divisions in northern railway zone and north eastern railway zone.
nagpur metro rail[edit]
nagpur metro
the nagpur metro project was announced by the state government of maharashtra with the expenses of inr 4,400 cr and 3,800 cr for its first phase which consists of two corridors – north–south corridor and east–west corridor of 39.4 km (24.5 mi).
the site inspection began in march 2012 with initiatives from nagpur improvement trust. the project is executed by a spv called maharashtra metro rail corporation limited (erstwhile nagpur metro rail corporation ltd.). in july 2015, the project was approved by the government of maharashtra. prime minister narendra modi inaugurated operations on nagpur metro on 7 march 2019 via video conferencing along with maharashtra chief minister devendra fadnavis and union cabinet minister nitin gadkari.
on 15 august 2022, nagpur metro made the record for single-day ridership of 90,758 passengers.
nagpur broad-gauge metro rail[edit]
the nagpur broad-gauge metro is a commuter rail project planned nagpur and extending up to adjacent districts of wardha and bhandara. the project is estimated to cost inr 418 cr and consists of four routes, each originating from nagpur and terminating at narkhed, ramtek, wardha and bhandara.
road[edit]
green bus in nagpur
nagpur is a major junction for roadways as india's two major national highways, srinagar-kanyakumari (national highway 44) and mumbai-kolkata (nh 53 economic corridor1(ec1)) pass through the city. national highway 47 connects nagpur to bamanbore in gujrat. nagpur is at the junction of two asian highways namely ah43 agra to matara, sri lanka and ah46 connecting kharagpur, india to dhule, india. the highway to mumbai via aurangabad, a shorter route, was re-built on the national highway basis. this highway significantly reduces the distance travelled by nh 6 and nh 3 between two cities. the new proposed mumbai–nagpur expressway between nagpur and mumbai will be 800 km (500 mi) and projected to cost ₹30,000 crore (us$3.8 billion). in 2009, nhai announced the extension of the existing nh 204 to nagpur via kolhapur-sangli- solapur-tuljapur-latur-nanded-yavatmal-wardha and connecting it to the nh-7 at butibori near nagpur. the entire nh 204 highway has been included in the national highway mega projects for upgradation to 4-lane. one more national highway nh-547 savner-chhindwara-narsinghpur has connected with nh 47 at savner near nagpur providing another optional connectivity with the northern part of india.
maharashtra state road transport corporation (msrtc) runs cheaper transport service for intercity, interstate, and intrastate travel. it has two bus stations in nagpur: nagpur bus sthanak (cbs-1) at ganeshpeth and morbhawan (cbs-2) at jhansi rani square, sitabuldi. it operates 1600 daily services from cbs-1 to long and short distances within the state and to places in other surrounding states. it also operates 750 daily services from cbs-2 to short distances within vidarbha.
the civic body through its bus operators (three red and one green) plies 487 buses by which over 1.60 lakh people commute. the city bus operation is named as aapli bus. the operators consist of diesel, ethanol and cng run buses.  a total of 5500 trips of 123 routes are covered by city buses. a common mobility card called maha-card has also been issued which will help people commute with buses and upcoming metro rail. a green bus project featuring india's first ethanol-powered buses was established in august 2014.
autorickshaws and private taxi operators under ola cabs and uber also ply in city.
air transport[edit]
nagpur international airport has the busiest air traffic control room in india.
dr. babasaheb ambedkar international airport (iata: nag, icao: vanp) is operated by mihan india private limited (mipl) and owned by airports authority of india.
nagpur's air traffic control (atc) is the busiest in india, with more than 300 flights flying over the city every day in 2004. in october 2005, nagpur's sonegaon airport was declared an international airport and was renamed dr. babasaheb ambedkar international airport.
nagpur is well connected by direct flights to mumbai, delhi, hyderabad, lucknow, kolkata, bangalore, pune, chennai, indore, ahmedabad and belagavi operated by air india, indigo, go first and star air. air arabia operates a 4 times a week to and fro flight between nagpur and sharjah and qatar airways operates a daily direct flight to and from doha.
the nagpur airport has received special achievement award 2012–2013 from airports authority of india. nagpur became the first airport in india to commission the indra system and also has ads-b system. no other airport in the country had commissioned indra yet. nagpur airport became the first airport in the country to receive an iso 27000 certificate. in fact, nagpur is not only the first in india but also the first in world to be certified for air navigation service provider (ansp). there are seven airports in the world which have iso 27000, but none of them have it for ansp.
the government of india has identified nagpur airport as one of the safe airports for diverted flights and emergency landing. in fact, many flights have used the airport during emergencies. this is because all international and domestic airlines had already been informed by the government to go to nagpur during emergencies. the availability of excellent fire fighting equipment, air traffic control equipment with latest radar, along with availability of good hospitals and hotels in the city, made the airport a good choice during emergencies.
nagpur airport has an annual capacity of 10 lakh passengers, but it handles more passengers than its capacity. airport expansion and improvement of service is in the cards and privatisation of the airport has been proposed by the government.
