naihati
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
railway service[edit]
naihati junction railway station is 38 km from sealdah on the sealdah-ranaghat line and 16 km from barrackpore. it is part of the kolkata suburban railway system. it is connected to bandel junction on the howrah-bardhaman main line. the journey takes about 20 minutes. garifa railway station is nearby also.
jubilee bridge
in 1857, the eastern bengal railway (ebr) was formed to lay the tracks along the east bank of the hooghly river to kushtia and then extended to goalundo ghat. the jubilee bridge linking bandel and naihati was opened on 21 february 1887, so that up country freight traffic could run up to kolkata port. finally, sampreeti bridge replaced jubilee bridge in 2017.
commuters[edit]
around a total of 32 lakh people from all around the city commute to kolkata daily for work. in the sealdah-krishnanagar section there are 34 trains that carry commuters from 30 railway stations. in the sealdah-shantipur section 32 trains carry commuters from 29 stations.
ferry service[edit]
naihati ferry service jetty ghat links to mechuabazar ferry service jetty ghat across the hooghly at chinsurah and the hooghly garifa boat service links ram ghat to hooghly ghat at hooghly.
public bus service[edit]
while state highway 1 passes through the heart of the city, kalyani expressway touches the outskirts. the naihati-habra road is an important local road.
the road transport is chiefly via the well known 85 no route (name of the bus route) which operates between kanchrapara and barrackpore. there are some other bus routes also like naihati to habra (73), naihati to barasat (87a and dn5), etc. a new state and also a private bus has started from naihati to digha, from kanthalpara railway bridge.
west bengal transport corporation bus (ctc)
c51 naihati - nabanna d2 habra — naihati [frequent] via ashoknagar, chowrangee, awalsiddhi, saheb colony, mamudpur d27 jadavpur — naihati e59 naihati - digha
private buses
73 habra - naihati 85 barrackpore court – kanchrapara 87a barasat – naihati dn5 barasat - naihati egra – naihati
