naihati
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]
[interactive fullscreen map] cities and towns in the northern portion of barrackpore subdivision in north 24 parganas districtm: municipal city/ town, ct: census town, n: neighbourhood, og: outgrowthowing to space constraints in the small map, the actual locations in a larger map may vary slightly
location[edit]
naihati is located at  wikiminiatlas22°54′n 88°25′e﻿ / ﻿22.9°n 88.42°e﻿ / 22.9; 88.42. it has an average elevation of 15 metres (49 feet).
naihati is bounded by garifa, halisahar and balibhara on the north, ramghat, indira nagar, rajendrapur, mamudpur and dogachhia on the east, bhatpara and madral on the south, and the hooghly on the west. although not specifically spelled out, it is evident that localities such as garifa, kultala, bibeksarani, bijaynagar, nimbagan and fingapara are neighbourhoods in naihati, though some consider them to a part of naihati.
96.02% of the population of barrackpore subdivision (partly presented in the map alongside) live in urban areas. in 2011, it had a density of population of 10,967 per km the subdivision has 16 municipalities and 24 census towns.
for most of the cities/ towns information regarding density of population is available in the infobox. population data is not available for neighbourhoods. it is available for the entire municipal area and thereafter ward-wise.
all places marked on the map are linked in the full-screen map.
police station[edit]
naihati police station under barrackpore police commissionerate has jurisdiction over naihati municipal area and barrackpore i cd block, including barrackpur cantonment board.
post office[edit]
naihati has a delivery sub post office, with pin 743165 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in calcutta region. other post offices with the same pin are naihati anandabazar and puranandapally. some regions of garifa post office (743166) also is inside naihati.
climate[edit]
being situated in the tropics, the climate of naihati is primarily hot and humid summers and cool and dry winters. the rain bearing clouds from the bay of bengal brings torrential rain in the monsoon. in the summer temperature goes as high as 40 degree celsius and in the winter it may reach 8 degree celsius.
