nashik
Industry[edit]
industry[edit]
the igatpuri-nashik-sinnar investment region is an important node in the us$90 billion delhi mumbai industrial corridor project.
nashik is a defense and aerospace manufacturing hub with hindustan aeronautics limited aircraft manufacturing plant located at ozar. the currency note press and india security press are on nashik road, where indian currency and government stamp papers are printed respectively.
sukhoi su-30mki is manufactured at hindustan aeronautics limited plant in nashik
existing industrial areas in nashik district are satpur, ambad, sinnar, igatpuri, dindori and vinchur. the proposed additional areas are sinnar, malegaon and rajur bahula.
large-scale industries present in nashik district are atlas copco, robert bosch gmbh, ceat limited, crompton greaves, graphite india, thyssenkrupp, epcos, everest industries, gabriel india, glaxosmithkline, hindustan coca-cola, hindustan unilever limited, jindal polyster, jyoti structures, kirlosker oil engines, ksb pumps, larsen & toubro, mahindra and mahindra, mahindra sona, united spirits limited, perfect circle industries, mahindra ugine steel, samsonite, shalimar paints, siemens, vip industries, indian oil corporation, xlo india limited and jindal saw.
apart from manufacturing, nashik is an emerging investment destination for information technology companies. tata consultancy services has invested in nashik under the government of india bpo promotion scheme (ibps). also wns, accenture, tcs has set up digital impact square, or disq, which is a social innovation center.
nashik has a textile industry. national bank for agriculture and rural development has selected yeola block for development of paithani cluster. to facilitate exports, a container freight station was started at midc ambad by the central government.
wine industry[edit]

main articles: nashik grape and nashik valley wine
tasting cellar at sula vineyards.
nashik has been described as "the wine capital of india"  the nashik region reportedly produced 10,000 tonnes of grapes per year.
in 2013, there were 22 wineries in nashik, out of 46 wineries throughout india. the largest vineyard in nashik is the sula vineyards.
in the harvest season, nashik is home to several wine festivals, such as the india grape harvest and sulafest.
