navi-mumbai
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
demu train at panvel, navi mumbai
nmmt ac volvo
belapur railway station
vashi station complex at night
navi mumbai has a robust infrastructure, is well connected to other parts of the state and country and is relatively less polluted compared to mumbai. the city has a good public transportation system with nmmt, the transport wing of nmmc, serving the bus commuters, the mumbai suburban railway serving the train commuters and a large fleet of auto rickshaws for intra-nodal commute. the mumbai-pune expressway starts at kalamboli in navi mumbai. the mumbai trans harbour link (mthl), also known as the sewri-nhava sheva trans harbour link, is an under construction 22-kilometre (14 mi) long freeway grade road bridge connecting south mumbai with navi mumbai.
the mumbai suburban railway network covers most of the populated regions of the city. the most important suburban stations are vashi, nerul, belapur and panvel. the stations are planned as major railway junctions. panvel is the only mainline station and also the busiest railway station of navi mumbai. all outstation trains halt here for time periods varying from 5 to 20 minutes. it is an important junction, railway lines come and meet here and it is connected to almost all parts of india. a new broad gauge line is functional between karjat & panvel.
brihanmumbai electric supply and transport (best) buses run from various area of mumbai to navi mumbai & navi mumbai municipal transport (nmmt) buses run all over navi mumbai and various area in mumbai, thane, bhiwandi, kalyan-dombivli-badlapur, panvel-khopoli-taloja, uran-ulwe etc. nmmt runs ac volvo buses from navi mumbai to mumbai, thane and kalyan-dombivli. the palm beach marg, a 10-kilometre (6.2 mi) long six lane road connects vashi to cbd belapur running parallel to the thane creek.
nmmt routes in navi mumbai
nmmt ac 1 cbd belapur bus stn to thane rly stn (w)   nmmt 2 airoli bus stn to purna village (bhiwandi) via thane   nmmt ac 4 vashi (sector 07) bus stn to thane rly stn (w)   nmmt 7 vashi rly stn to thane rly stn (w)   nmmt ac 8 vashi rly stn to thane rly stn (w) via ghansoli village   nmmt ac 9 vashi rly stn to ghansoli gharonda   nmmt 10 sanpada rly stn to ghansoli depot via apmc market   nmmt 11 sanpada rly stn to thane rly stn (w) via midc   nmmt ac 14 nerul sector 46/48 to dy patil college (nerul lp)   nmmt ac 15 nerul sector 46/48 to dy patil college (nerul lp)   nmmt ac 17 nerul rly stn (e) to baman dongri rly stn (e)   nmmt 18 ghansoli depot to kharkopar rly stn (e)   nmmt ac 20 ghansoli depot to nerul sector 46/48   nmmt ac 21 vashi (sector 07) bus stn to artist colony (cbd) via nerul (e)   nmmt ac 22 vashi (sector 07) bus stn to jalvayu vihar (kharghar) via nerul (w)   nmmt ac 23 cbd belapur bus stn to kharkopar rly stn (e)   nmmt 24 panvel rly stn (w) to thane rly stn (w)   nmmt 26 belapur rly stn to thane rly stn (w)   nmmt 30 kalamboli (roadpali) to uran (pensioners park)   nmmt 31 kopar khairane bus stn to uran (pensioners park)   nmmt ac 34 jui nagar rly stn (e) to jnpt township   nmmt 41 vashi rly stn to dombivli rly stn (w) via turbhe naka   nmmt ac 42 vashi rly stn to dombivli rly stn (w) via kopar khairane   nmmt ac 44 belapur rly stn to dombivli rly stn (w) via turbhe naka   nmmt 46 vashi rly stn to badlapur fire brigade via turbhe naka   nmmt 47 belapur rly stn to badlapur fire brigade via taloja midc   nmmt 49 belapur rly stn to karjat   nmmt 50 kopar khairane bus stn to panvel rly stn (w)   nmmt 52 belapur rly stn to taloja via kharghar   nmmt 53 kharghar rly stn to raf colony   nmmt 54 kharghar rly stn to shilp valley (sector 36)   nmmt 55 ghansoli depot to taloja via kharghar   nmmt 56 mansarovar rly stn to roadpali via kalamboli   nmmt 58 belapur rly stn to khopoli   nmmt 60 vashi rly stn to kalyan rly stn (w) via turbhe naka   nmmt ac 61 belapur rly stn to kalyan rly stn (w) via turbhe naka   nmmt ac 62 vashi rly stn to kalyan rly stn (w) via kopar khairane   nmmt 64 digha (airoli) to kalyan rly stn (w)   nmmt 73 panvel rly stn (w) to kalyan rly stn (w) via taloja midc   nmmt 75 panvel rly stn (w) to sai nagar   nmmt 76 panvel rly stn (w) to karanjade sector 06   nmmt 77 panvel rly stn (e) to mahalaxmi nagar (nere village)   nmmt 81 vashi rly stn to mumbra retibunder via turbhe naka   nmmt 82 vashi rly stn to diva rly stn (e) via turbhe naka   nmmt 83 airoli bus stn to thane rly stn (w) via patni   nmmt 86 airoli bus stn to diva rly stn (e) via thane   nmmt ac 100 vashi rly stn to lokmanya nagar (thane) via mulund gawanpada   nmmt 103 panvel rly stn (w) to dadar (hindmata)   nmmt ac 105 cbd belapur bus stn to bandra rly stn (w)   nmmt ac 106 panvel rly stn (w) to world trade centre via eastern freeway   nmmt ac 108 nerul sector 46/48 to world trade centre via eastern freeway   nmmt ac 110 jalvayu vihar (kharghar) to world trade centre via eastern freeway   nmmt 113 l&t company (mahape) to nahur rly stn (e)   nmmt ac 114 ghansoli gharonda to world trade centre via eastern freeway   nmmt ac 116 jalvayu vihar (kharghar) to parel (sant rohidas chowk)   nmmt ac 125 jalvayu vihar (kharghar) to borivali rly stn (e)   nmmt ac 131 airoli bus stn to borivali rly stn (e) via ghodbunder road   nmmt ac 144 airoli bus stn to andheri rly stn (e)
best routes in navi mumbai
best 501 kurla rly stn (e) to airoli bus stn   best 502 tata power stn (chembur) to nerul sector 46/48   best ac-504 deonar depot to jalvayu vihar (kharghar)   best c-505 bandra depot to cbd belapur bus stn   best 506 deonar depot to nerul bus stn   best 507 santacruz rly stn (e) to apmc market (vashi) via sclr   best 511 ghatkopar depot to nerul bus stn   best 512 mulund (w) check naka bus stn to nerul bus stn   best c-513 mulund depot to vashi rly stn   best 517 santacruz rly stn (e) to apmc market (vashi)   best c-521 wadala depot to ghansoli gharonda   best 522 marol depot to millenium business park (mahape)   best 523 dindoshi depot to airoli bus stn   best 525 majas depot to vashi rly stn   best 533 agarkar chowk andheri rly stn (e) to apmc market (vashi)   best 545 agarkar chowk andheri rly stn (e) to airoli bus stn   best c-53 ghatkopar depot to kalamboli bus stn   best c-54 worli depot to airoli bus stn via bkc
auto rickshaws provide inter as well as intra nodal public transport across the city. taxis operating from designated taxi stands provide the means to travel to further destinations. taxis charge a fixed rate approved by the r. t. o. details of which can be found on popular local transit apps of the city.
navi mumbai has the largest container terminal in india, jawaharlal nehru port at nhava sheva near uran. it is well connected by road and rail, and handles approximately 56.13% of india's container traffic. the chhatrapati shivaji maharaj international airport, 30 km away, is the nearest airport to the city.
international airport[edit]

main article: navi mumbai international airport
the navi mumbai international airport is being constructed in southern panvel near ulwe. it is being built through public private partnership (ppp), with private sector partners having 74% equity and the airports authority of india (aai) and government of maharashtra (through cidco) each holding 13%.
the international civil aviation organization (icao) has already given techno-feasibility clearance to the airport. the central government provided cabinet approval for the construction on 31 may 2007. the airport's construction was started in august 2021, and is expected to be fully operational by december 2024.
metro rail[edit]

main article: navi mumbai metro
the navi mumbai metro is an under construction rapid transit system in navi mumbai. a network of as many as six lines have been planned of which four lines will be constructed by cidco in the navi mumbai south region, the second and third line of the metro system will be constructed by nmmc and mmrda respectively. the first line of the metro system is being constructed by cidco. this line includes three phases. in the first phase, the line will join the cbd belapur station on the mumbai suburban railway and pendhar village. in the second phase, the line will join taloja midc and khandeshwar node (which will be extended to the navi mumbai international airport in ulwe node of the city), and in the third phase, the line will link the pendhar and taloja midc metro stations. the first phase of the line 1 is slated to become operational by 2020 and cidco has claimed to make the network of its four lines fully operational by 2022–2023 along with operationalisation of the city's international airport in ulwe node. the cost of the metro project has risen from 4,163 crore for 21.45 km in 2011 to 8,904 crore for 26.26 km in 2018.
