navi-mumbai
planned city in mumbai maharashtra, india
not to be confused with mumbai.

city in maharashtra, india
navi mumbaicityform top left to right: navi mumbai skyline, vashi sector 30a, utsav chowk, vashi sector 30a, vashi railway station, navi mumbai municipal corporation, dy patil stadiumnavi mumbainavi mumbainavi mumbainavi mumbai (india)navi mumbainavi mumbai (mumbai)show map of maharashtrashow map of indiashow map of mumbaishow allcoordinates: 19°01′n 73°01′e﻿ / ﻿19.02°n 73.02°e﻿ / 19.02; 73.02coordinates: 19°01′n 73°01′e﻿ / ﻿19.02°n 73.02°e﻿ / 19.02; 73.02countryindiastatemaharashtradistrictsincludes parts of thane, raigad districtsplanned, developed and owned bycidcoelevation14 m (46 ft)population • total1,119,488language • officialmarathivehicle registrationmh-43 (navi mumbai's thane district), mh-46 (panvel raigad district)
navi mumbai (marathi pronunciation: [nəʋiː mumbəiː]), is a planned city situated on the west coast of the indian subcontinent, located in the konkan division of maharashtra state, on the mainland of india.  navi mumbai is part of the mumbai metropolitan region (mmr). the city is divided into two, north navi mumbai and south navi mumbai, for the individual development of panvel mega city, which includes the area from kharghar to uran, including the  taloja node. the agri and koli communities mainly reside in navi mumbai. navi mumbai was the host city for the inaugural final of the ipl (2008) at dy patil stadium. thane belapur marg and palm beach marg are major business attraction and upmarket residential areas respectively. navi mumbai has a population of 1,119,477 as per the 2011 provisional census. it has an average city elevation of 14 meters, excluding forest area.
the city's or area history dates back to the late 1500s when siddis of janjira built the belapur killa located atop a hillock, near the mouth of the panvel creek. in 1682, the fort was captured by the portuguese, who had managed to annex the regions controlled by the siddis, near belapur.
in 1733, the marathas, led by chimaji appa, wrested control of the fort from the portuguese. he had made a vow that if it were to be successfully recaptured from the portuguese, he would place a garland of beli leaves in a nearby amruthaishwar temple, and after the victory the fort was christened as belapur fort. the marathas ruled the area until 23 june 1817, when it was captured by captain charles gray of the british east india company. the british partially destroyed the fort under their policy of razing any maratha stronghold in the area.
the area was proposed in 1971 as a new urban township of mumbai by the government of maharashtra. a new public sector undertaking, cidco, was established for this purpose. navi mumbai is situated across two districts, thane and raigad. the city has been ranked 3rd among 73 cities surveyed for cleanliness and hygiene by the union ministry of urban development (moud) and quality council of india (qci) as a part of swachh bharat abhiyan. majority of infrastructure and buildings are made & owned by government of india.
navi mumbai is home to various educational institutions offering courses in several streams including engineering, medical sciences, interior design, and hotel management. various multinational corporations have their head offices/branches across the city, making it an active business hub. navi mumbai also has various recreational facilities such as a golf course, central park and pandavkada water falls in kharghar. navi mumbai also has many quality restaurants and luxury hotels for accommodation. there are many shopping malls. navi mumbai is also a host to many best health care centres and hospitals like mitr hospital in sector 05, kharghar, fortis hiranandani hospital near juhu village, juhu nagar (vashi), apollo hospital in belapur and srl diagnostic centres in kharghar, panvel, kamothe, kalamboli, kopar khairane, juhu gaon to name a few.
