navi-mumbai
Administration[edit]
administration[edit]
cidco[edit]
when navi mumbai was created in the 1970s, cidco was the only authority that looked after the development and maintenance of the city. cidco prepared a developmental plan for navi mumbai covering 95 villages all over the city.
navi mumbai streets at night
for the first ten years of the project cidco acted as the planning and administrative body and as the developer and builder for the project. taxes on property, land, commercial and water were payable to cidco.
cidco planned 14 nodes divided into the north and the south part. the 7 nodes in the north part are airoli node, ghansoli node, kopar khairane node, vashi node, sanpada node, nerul node and belapur node. the 7 nodes in the south part are kharghar node, kamothe node, kalamboli node, pushpak nagar node, panvel node, ulwe node and dronagiri node. also, two municipal bodies have been established, navi mumbai municipal corporation (nmmc) in the north and panvel municipal corporation in the south. each of the nodes is divided into smaller groups called sectors.
initially only juhu nagar, vashi, nerul and cbd belapur were developed by cidco with housing, schools and community centre roads. but after the arrival of the harbour railway line extension in the 1990s, there was an increase in population. cidco shifted its development plan to nodes like kharghar, kamothe, new panvel and kopar khairane. in its new development plan, cidco land was allocated to builders for housing. cidco only provided basic infrastructure like roads, water and electricity, these nodes were developed mostly by private builders according to the cidco plan.
the newly developed nodes of navi mumbai on the south side like kharghar, kamothe, new panvel and kalamboli are maintained by cidco. these nodes, which are all beyond cbd belapur, come under the raigad district.
nmmc[edit]
on 17 december 1991, navi mumbai municipal corporation (nmmc) was constituted by the state government for maintaining some of the developed nodes of navi mumbai.
local self-government started on 1 january 1992. nmmc was handed seven of the 14 nodes of the navi mumbai project area for its jurisdiction. however, cidco, as a planning authority, has rights on the open plots in these seven nodes.
the nmmc jurisdiction starts at digha in the north and ends at belapur in the south. the nmmc area is planned into seven nodes (zones). the nine nodes are belapur node, nerul node, sanpada node, vashi node, kopar khairane node, ghansoli node and airoli node.
nmmc main building
navi mumbai municipal corporation is rated amongst the richest corporations in maharashtra.
the municipal corporation is headed by a municipal commissioner and an elected mayor. currently, due to delayed in corporation election, the commissioner of corporation mr. abhijeet bangar takes the charge of administrator for management of navi mumbai municipal corporation until next elections.
pmc[edit]
recently a resolution has been passed by the general body of the panvel municipal council (pmc), which previously administered the city of old panvel spread across an area of 12.11 sq. km. with a population of 1.8 lakh (0.18 mn), lead to upgrade the municipal council to a municipal corporation. but the minimum requirement for the formation of a municipal corporation is having a population of at least 300,000 which the council falls short of. hence, a decision has been made by the pmc to incorporate the adjacent nodes of navi mumbai under cidco's jurisdiction and surrounding villages in the proposed panvel municipal corporation. this would add another 593,000 people under its administration. thereby clearing the first hurdle.
the decision propounds that instead of merging the administration of newly developed nodes of navi mumbai including new panvel, kamothe, kalamboli, kharghar, parts of uran and developing nodes of ulwe and dronagiri, which are currently overseen by cidco, with nmmc, they should be incorporated under the proposed panvel municipal corporation. this opinion is the result of a political agenda. the fact is, of the total 14 nodes of navi mumbai 7 are under nmmc and the rest are under cidco. nmmc's jurisdiction is limited within the boundaries of the thane district, which is a foothold of the nationalist congress party, while the remaining nodes are in the raigad district, where parties like bharatiya janata party, shiv sena and peasants and workers party of india are most active. hence, the local politicians, especially panvel mla prashant thakur, oppose the merger of all the nodes under one municipal corporation citing political conspiracy. in panvel municipal corporation bjp is in power and peasants and workers party of india leading the opposition represent by pritam mhatre.
the proposal is to be tabled before the maharashtra state government which has appointed an expert committee to study the feasibility of the demand to upgrade the panvel municipal council to a municipal corporation.
but there is some discontent among the residents of the kharghar node. the residents and some ngos from kharghar have voiced their demand for kharghar to be inducted under nmmc as it would provide them with better civic amenities and would make kharghar eligible to be a part of the proposed plan of making navi mumbai a smart city which includes only the area under nmmc's jurisdiction. but, in actual, cidco south navi mumbai will be mmr's second smart city. the other one being the north navi mumbai, which is under nmmc's jurisdiction. state government has asked cidco to develop south navi mumbai as a smart city as it will be a role model for other states in the country. smart city project includes, navi mumbai international airport, mumbai trans harbour link connecting ulwe with sewri, a long coastal link from dronagiri, extension of the palm beach road from kopar khairane to airoli, extension of national highway, local train railway from panvel to ulwe and uran, new metro projects, including cbd belapur, taloja, khandeshwar and navi mumbai airport metro project, development of fourth container terminal in jnpt, new greenfield cities, one near uran, affordable housing schemes for low income groups and project affected peoples (paps), new parks, playgrounds, auditoriums, bhavans, noise and air quality index checkers using advanced technologies, modern sewage treatment plants.  cidco has its own plan of developing the area under its jurisdiction (informally called as navi mumbai south) as a smart city. everything will be completed by 2022, except the airport.
