navi-mumbai
Education[edit]
education[edit]

main article: schools and colleges in navi mumbai
provision of schools and colleges was priority in the planning of navi mumbai. the nodes (townships) were designed to provide one primary school per 5,000 populations, one high school for 12,500 populations and one college for 50,000 population.
each of the nodes is self-sufficient in terms of providing quality education. students are given access to various syllabi, including the state education board, cbse, igcse, ib and icse patterns. other than this, cidco encouraged private institutions as well.
about 22.5% of the total population is considered to be school-going children. most students attend school and college within their node (township). 76% of the students walk to their school or college, 12% use public transport, 10% use bicycles and only 2% travel by school bus.
a number of premier schools and colleges have been set up in navi mumbai. and not just local students, but students from mumbai and even outside come to navi mumbai in their quest for quality education. as such, navi mumbai is quickly acquiring the title of educational hub.
colleges[edit]
amity university dy patil university iim indore (mumbai campus) indian maritime university, navi mumbai campus itm group of institutions national institute of fashion technology nift mumbai
engineering colleges[edit]

datta meghe college of engineering, airoli fr. conceicao rodrigues institute of technology indian institution of industrial engineering, belapur lokmanya tilak college of engineering, koparkhairane ramrao adik institute of technology, nerul sies graduate school of technology, nerul terna engineering college, nerul
schools[edit]

avalon heights international school bharati vidyapeeth institute of technology d. a. v. public school, nerul dayanand anglo vedic public school, airoli delhi public school, nerul fr. agnel multipurpose school and junior college, vashi goldcrest high international school new horizon scholars school, airoli ryan international schools, sanpada, kharghar, vashi, kalamboli seventh-day adventist higher secondary school (icse & isc) sacred heart high school, vashi vibgyor group of schools, airoli vibgyor group of schools, kharghar vishwajyot high school, kharghar
