navi-mumbai
Implementation, development and issues[edit]
implementation, development and issues[edit]
navi mumbai traffic at rush hour
low income housing facilities in navi mumbai
vashi, navi mumbai
skyline of nerul, navi mumbai
seawoods grand central mall, navi mumbai
utsav chowk at kharghar
the planning of navi mumbai began in 1971 and involved leading architects and urban planner like charles correa (chief architect), shirish patel, pravina mehta and r. k. jha (chief planner), the city and industrial development corporation (cidco) was established on 17 march 1971, under the indian companies act, 1956 for this purpose. the area covered 150 kilometres (93 mi) of the total 720 kilometres (450 mi) of the konkan coast. privately owned land consisting of 86 villages covering 15,954 hectares (39,420 acres) within the present limits of navi mumbai and further villages measuring an additional 2,870 hectares (7,100 acres) were acquired by the government of maharashtra. navi mumbai covers the southern part of thane taluka (from thane district) and part of panvel and uran talukas (from raigad district).
cidco carved out 19 small nodes with a view towards facilitating comprehensive development. these nodes were named airoli, ghansoli, kopar khairane, juhu nagar, vashi, turbhe, sanpada, juinagar, nerul, darave, karave nagar, cbd belapur, kharghar, kamothe, new panvel, kalamboli, ulwe, dronagiri and taloja.
cidco planned and constructed all the railway stations, roads and public spaces in navi mumbai and developed nearby areas commercially.
vashi bridge across the creek
in 1973, the vashi bridge was opened to the public for residents of vashi, cbd belapur and nerul. the sion-panvel highway was built to reduce the time taken to travel from sion to panvel. initially, there was not much response to the new city. major changes took place only after 1990, with the commissioning of a wholesale agricultural produce market at turbhe and the construction of a commuter railway line from mankhurd to vashi in may 1992. these developments caused a sudden growth in economic activities and population in navi mumbai.
the city was originally planned to create affordable housing for people who could not afford living in mumbai. it was decided not to let any slum pockets pop up across the city. but it failed. as, according to the 2001 census, a fifth to a third of the population of municipalised navi mumbai lives in slums  and gaothans (urban villages), with thousands of buildings violating planning norms.
by the end of the 1990s, the planning authority of navi mumbai initiated private participation in the developmental activity of navi mumbai. a new railway link between nerul and uran was inaugurated on 11 november 2018. southern navi mumbai is being developed rapidly with its class infrastructure and modern nodes of kharghar, kamothe, panvel and kalamboli. these nodes are experiencing major infrastructural developments due to their proximity to the proposed navi mumbai international airport. also, the latest development known as 'one time planning' with an estimated budget of ₹12,821 crores is underway to transform the municipalised navi mumbai on the lines of the mega cities of the world.
