nellore
History[edit]
history[edit]
nellore had been under the rule of  mauryas, satavahanas, cholas, pallavas, pandyas, kharavela of chedi dynasty, kakatiyas, eastern gangas of kalinga empire, vijayanagara empire, arcot nawabs and other dynasties.
nellore was ruled by ashoka of the mauryan dynasty in the 3rd century bce. nellore was conquered by the rulers of the pallava dynasty and it was under their rule till the 6th century ce, subsequently the chola rulers ruled nellore for a long period of time. the cholas met their decline in the 13th century ce. tamil inscriptions indicate that it formed part of chola kingdom till their decline in the thirteenth century ce. it later became a part of kakatiyas, vijayanagara empire, sultanate of golconda, mughal empire and arcot nawabdom. in the 18th century, nellore was taken over by the british from the arcot nawabs and was part of the madras presidency of british india.
history under british rule as madras presidency[edit]
the first account was by produced by john boswell in 1873 as collector. this report by the british includes climate, agricultaure, health statistics as well important taxation information. social structure including important families of nellore from the 1800's. these included venketagiri raja, kalhastri rajah, the chundi zamindhar, the mutiyalpad zamindhar, sayidapur zamindhar, jupalli zamindhars of udayagiri, udayagiri jaghirediar, the vazella zamidhars of gudur, zamindhars of ongole, turrawar poligar, tadeboyina polighar, the chettiars polighar, the udathawar polighar, the gangulawar poighar and buchireddypalem family. these families under the british raj were responsible for the villages and lands in their possession. the british recognized the importance of nellore in cultivation as well as important port of krishnapatam.  the city had an important role in the emergence of the telugu language and the formation of the state of andhra pradesh. potti sriramulu, who fasted until death for the formation of andhra pradesh, hailed from nellore.
