new-delhi
Transport
transport

main article: transport in delhi

the new delhi outer ring roadindira gandhi international airportthe delhi metroa view of delhi faridabad skywaythe delhi-gurgaon expressway, connecting delhi to the indira gandhi international airportthe delhi noida direct flyway (dnd flyway)
air
indira gandhi international airport, situated to the southwest of delhi, is the main gateway for the city's domestic and international civilian air traffic. in 2012–13, the airport was used by more than 35 million passengers, making it one of the busiest airports in south asia. terminal 3, which cost ₹96.8 billion (us$1.2 billion) to construct between 2007 and 2010, handles an additional 37 million passengers annually.
the delhi flying club, established in 1928 with two de havilland moth aircraft named delhi and roshanara, was based at safdarjung airport which started operations in 1929, when it was the delhi's only airport and the second in india. the airport functioned until 2001, however in january 2002 the government closed the airport for flying activities because of security concerns following the new york attacks in september 2001. since then, the club only carries out aircraft maintenance courses, and is used for helicopter rides to indira gandhi international airport for vip including the president and the prime minister.
in 2010, indira gandhi international airport (igia) was conferred the fourth best airport award in the world in the 15–25 million category, and best improved airport in the asia-pacific region by airports council international. the airport was rated as the best airport in the world in the 25–40 million passengers category in 2015, by airports council international. delhi airport also bags two awards for the best airport in central asia/india and best airport staff in central asia/india at the skytrax world airport awards 2015.
road
new delhi has one of india's largest bus transport systems. buses are operated by the state-owned delhi transport corporation (dtc), which owns the largest fleet of compressed natural gas (cng)-fueled buses in the world and delhi transit. personal vehicles especially cars also form a major chunk of vehicles plying on new delhi roads. new delhi has the highest number of registered cars compared to any other metropolitan city in india. taxis and auto rickshaws also ply on new delhi roads in large numbers. new delhi has one of the highest road density in india and average vehicle speed is around 15–20 km/h (9.3–12.4 mph) in peak hours in the city.
some roads and expressways serve as important pillars of new delhi's road infrastructure:
inner ring road is one of the most important "state highways" in new delhi. it is a 51 km long circular road, which connects important areas in new delhi. owing to more than 2 dozen grade-separators/flyovers, the road is almost signal-free. outer ring road is another major artery in new delhi that links far-flung areas of delhi. the delhi noida direct flyway (dnd flyway) is an eight-laned access controlled tolled expressway which connects new delhi and delhi to noida (an important satellite city of uttar pradesh). the acronym dnd stands for "delhi-noida direct". 'the delhi gurgaon expressway is a 28 km (17 mi) expressway connecting new delhi to gurgaon, an important satellite city of haryana. the delhi faridabad skyway is controlled tolled expressway which connects new delhi to faridabad, an important satellite city of haryana.
national highways passing through new delhi
new delhi is connected by road to the rest of india through national highways:
national highway 19 (india) (old number: nh 2), commonly referred as delhi-kolkata road is a busy indian national highway that runs through the states of delhi, haryana, uttar pradesh, bihar, jharkhand, and west bengal. national highway 44 (india) is a national highway that connects srinagar with kanyakumari and passes through delhi. national highway 48 (india) is a national highway that connects new delhi with chennai. national highway 9 (india) is a national highway that connects malout in punjab to pithoragarh in uttarakhand and passes through delhi.
railway
station name  station code  railway zone  total platforms   new delhi  ndls  northern railway  16   old delhi  dli  northern railway  16   hazrat nizamuddin  nzm  northern railway  7   anand vihar terminal  anvt  northern railway  7   delhi sarai rohilla  dee  northern railway  7
new delhi is a major junction in the indian railway network and is the headquarters of the northern railway. the five main railway stations are new delhi railway station, old delhi, nizamuddin railway station, anand vihar railway terminal and sarai rohilla. the delhi ring railway, a 35-kilometre circular railway network in delhi that runs parallel to the ring road, is a part of delhi's suburban railway services.
metro

main article: delhi metro
delhi metro – phase 2
the delhi metro is a rapid transit system serving delhi, faridabad, ghaziabad, gurgaon and noida in the national capital region of india. delhi metro is the world's 12th largest metro system in terms of length. delhi metro was india's first modern public transportation system, which had revolutionised travel by providing a fast, reliable, safe, and comfortable means of transport. presently, the network consists of 10 colour-coded lines serving 255 stations with a total length of 348.12 kilometres (216.31 mi). the network has now crossed the boundaries of delhi to reach ghaziabad and noida in uttar pradesh, and faridabad and gurgaon in haryana. all stations have escalators, elevators, and tactile tiles to guide the visually impaired from station entrances to trains. it has a combination of elevated, at-grade, and underground lines, and uses both broad gauge and standard gauge rolling stock. four types of rolling stock are used: mitsubishi-rotem broad gauge, bombardier movia, mitsubishi-rotem standard gauge, and caf beasain standard gauge. according to a study, delhi metro has helped in removing about 390,000 vehicles from the streets of delhi.
delhi metro is being built and operated by the delhi metro rail corporation limited (dmrc), a state-owned company with equal equity participation from government of india and government of national capital territory of delhi. however, the organisation is under administrative control of ministry of urban development, government of india. besides construction and operation of delhi metro, dmrc is also involved in the planning and implementation of metro rail, monorail and high-speed rail projects in india and providing consultancy services to other metro projects in the country as well as abroad. the delhi metro project was spearheaded by padma vibhushan e. sreedharan, the managing director of dmrc and popularly known as the "metro man" of india. he famously resigned from dmrc, taking moral responsibility for a metro bridge collapse which took five lives. sreedharan was awarded with the legion of honour by the french government for his contribution to delhi metro.
