new-delhi
Culture
culture
new delhi is a cosmopolitan city due to the multi-ethnic and multi-cultural presence of the vast indian bureaucracy and political system. the city's capital status has amplified the importance of national events and holidays. national events such as republic day, independence day and gandhi jayanti (gandhi's birthday) are celebrated with great enthusiasm in new delhi and the rest of india. on india's independence day (15 august), the prime minister of india addresses the nation from the red fort. most delhiites celebrate the day by flying kites, which are considered a symbol of freedom. the republic day parade is a large cultural and military parade showcasing india's cultural diversity and military might.
religious festivals include diwali (the festival of light), maha shivaratri, teej, durga puja, mahavir jayanti, guru nanak jayanti, holi, lohri, eid ul-fitr, eid ul-adha, easter, raksha bandhan, and christmas. the qutub festival is a cultural event during which performances of musicians and dancers from all over india are showcased at night, with the qutub minar as the chosen backdrop of the event. other events such as kite flying festival, international mango festival and vasant panchami (the spring festival) are held every year in delhi.
in 2007, the japanese buddhist organisation nipponzan myohoji decided to build a peace pagoda in the city containing buddha relics. it was inaugurated by the dalai lama.
historic sites, museums and gardens
the national museum in new delhi is one of the largest museums in india.
new delhi is home to several historic sites and museums. the national museum, which began with an exhibition of indian art and artefacts at the royal academy in london in the winter of 1947–48, was later at the end was shown at the rashtrapati bhawan in 1949. later it was to form a permanent national museum. on 15 august 1949, the national museum was formally inaugurated and has 200,000 works of art, both of indian and foreign origin, covering over 5,000 years.
the india gate, which was built in 1931, was inspired by the arc de triomphe in paris. it is the national monument of india commemorating the 90,000 soldiers of the indian army who died while fighting for the british raj in world war i and the third anglo-afghan war. the monument is barricaded now with entry to inside arch restricted.
the rajpath, which was built similar to the champs-élysées in paris, is the ceremonial boulevard for the republic of india, located in new delhi. the annual republic day parade takes place here on 26 january. the beating retreat takes place here two days later.
the rajghat, the final resting place of mahatma gandhi.
gandhi smriti in new delhi is the location where mahatma gandhi spent the last 144 days of his life and was assassinated on 30 january 1948. rajghat is the place where mahatma gandhi was cremated on 31 january 1948 after his assassination and his ashes were buried and make it a final resting place beside the sanctity of the yamuna river. the raj ghat in the shape of large square platform with black marble was designed by architect vanu bhuta.
jantar mantar located in connaught place was built by maharaja jai singh ii of jaipur. it consists of 13 architectural astronomy instruments. the primary purpose of the observatory was to compile astronomical tables, and to predict the times and movements of the sun, moon and planets.
new delhi is home to indira gandhi memorial museum, national gallery of modern art, national museum of natural history, national rail museum, national handicrafts and handlooms museum, national philatelic museum, nehru planetarium, shankar's international dolls museum. and supreme court of india museum,
in the coming years, a new national war memorial and museum will be constructed in new delhi for ₹4,000 million (us$50 million).
new delhi is particularly renowned for its beautifully landscaped gardens that can look quite stunning in spring. the largest of these include buddha jayanti park and the historic lodi gardens. in addition, there are the gardens in the presidential estate, the gardens along the rajpath and india gate, the gardens along shanti path, the rose garden, nehru park and the railway garden in chanakya puri. also of note is the garden adjacent to the jangpura metro station near the defence colony flyover, as are the roundabout and neighbourhood gardens throughout the city.
the new delhi municipal council (ndmc) area was declared the cleanest in north india, based on solid waste management, access to sanitation and other parameters of cleanliness, under the zone-wise swachh survekshan 2017.
