nizamabad-telangana
Administration[edit]
administration[edit]
nizamabad urban development authority[edit]
the government of telangana released a go in 2017 setting up nizamabad urban development authority (nuda) to develop nizamabad municipal corporation and surrounding 60 villages situated in six mandals. nuda with a geographical area of 169.37 square kilometres (65.39 sq mi) spreading across north, south and rural mandals of the city sees over the infrastructure development and planning for the 633,933 residents under its jurisdiction.
municipal corporation[edit]
the nizamabad municipal corporation is the municipal governing body of the city which consists of democratically elected members, headed by a mayor which administers the city's infrastructure, civic administration and water supply. nizamabad municipality was constituted in the year 1931 and upgraded as special grade municipality in the year 1987 and as a corporation on 5 march 2005 vide go. no:109. the jurisdiction of the civic body is spread over an urbanized but dense area of 42.9 km (16.6 sq mi) and has 60 municipal wards.
e-governance services[edit]
for providing facilities to the people the government of telangana started meeseva (at your service) centres all around the city and the state. the main purpose of this facility was to bring public services closer to home. meeseva provides online signed digital certificates like income certificates, residence certificates, land records and other registration records. these records are further stored online for database. nizamabad along with hyderabad are the only districts in the telangana state which have their own passport seva kendras, these offices carter the need of other districts of telangana state.
law and order[edit]

main article: nizamabad police
nizamabad city police suv
the nizamabad police commissionerate is the local law enforcement agency for the city and is headed by the commissioner of police. the city police traces its origins to 1847 under hyderabad state. the city is under strict vigilance by the commissionerate as there are 72 cctv cameras installed at various traffic junctions and the infrastructure includes interceptor vehicles, online presence and a large fleet of mahindra bolero suvs. apart from crime branch, the police also has traffic branch, she teams, blue colts and mobile patrolling fleet.
healthcare[edit]
being the third largest city in the state, nizamabad is known for its medical care in northern telangana region. government general hospital is one of the largest government hospital in the state, also serving patients from the cities and neighbouring districts of nanded and adilabad. khaleelwadi, also known as doctor's lane, is a densely hospital clustered area comprising more than 200 major private hospitals and many laboratories. considering the better infrastructure and resources available, government medical college was established in 2012. there are speciality hospitals for maternity care, chest hospitals, meghna hospital for dental care, indur cancer hospital. apart from these multi-speciality hospitals in the city, pragati hospital is one of the only hospitals among the neighbouring districts which has recently established a heart transplantation wing.
