nizamabad-telangana
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
biryani is the most served dish across the restaurants
nizamabad's culture enriched under the patronage of nizams. the city has a diverse culture with major proportion of city population being hindus and muslims and this mixing of religions has also resulted in many festivals being celebrated in nizamabad such as ganesh chaturthi and diwali of hindu tradition and eid ul-fitr, mawlid and eid al-adha by muslims. telugu and urdu are major languages spoken by the city people, however english is also widely used for communication purpose. even though the city has different religious communities, the people of nizamabad are known for their harmony, cultural amalgamation and religious unity .
cuisine[edit]
nizamabadi cuisine mainly comprises rice, wheat and meat dishes. south indian cuisine which include dosa, vada, puri and idly are common breakfast items. hyderabadi biriyani with its blend of mughlai and arab influences and tahari are other dishes. the traditional food items like harees, haleem and nihari are common foods during ramadan.
tourism[edit]
a gurudwara in nizamabad
sri ram sagar project at pochampahad
nizamabad fort is situated on the southwest of the city which was built by rashtrakuta kings in around the 10th century, the fort was captured by asaf jahis who were the nizams of hyderabad, who then rebuilt the fort. archaeological and heritage museum was opened in october 2001 and is situated in the tilak garden premises which is opened seasonally. the museum houses various artifacts and antiquities representing the evolution of human civilization from paleolithic to vijayanagara empire(i.e. 16th. a.d). the museum is divided into three sections, namely archaeological section, sculptural gallery and bronze and decorative gallery. bidri articles and arms and weapons of extensive variety are also exhibited.
alisagar is a park and tourist attraction which is 13 km from nizamabad and 2 km (1.2 mi) off the nizamabad-bodhan road. the garden is spread across 33 acres, with a deer park, trekking and water sports facility. it also has a hilltop guest house built by nizam and is under renovation as of 2015. ashok sagar is a lake, park and tourist attraction situated in jankampet area, 07 km from centre of the city. it has a rock garden with illuminated rocks and also has boating facilities. neela kanteshwar temple is a temple dedicated to the powerful shiva (mahadev) .the temple attracts a large number of devotees coming from different corners the state and the district. this famous temple was constructed for the jains by the satavahana king, satakarni-ii. the structure has a lot of resemblance with the north indian architectural style. the festival of ratha sapthami is an annual event celebrated on a grand scale with a lot of pomp in this temple.
badapahad dargah is one of the oldest muslim pilgrim centres, built in the memory of hazrat syed hussaini, on top of a hillock located at a distance of 38 km from the city.
