noida
Administration[edit]
administration[edit]
authority[edit]
the city's infrastructure is looked after by the noida authority, a statutory authority set-up under uttar pradesh industrial area development act, 1976. authority's head is its chairman sanjiv kumar mittal, who is an ias officer, the authority's daily matters, however, are looked after by its ceo, who is also an ias officer. noida authority comes under the infrastructure and industrial development department of uttar pradesh government. the chairman of noida authority is alok tandon and ceo is ritu maheshwari.
general administration[edit]
the gautam budh nagar district is a part of meerut division, headed by the divisional commissioner, who is an ias officer of high seniority, the commissioner is the head of local government institutions (including municipal corporations) in the division, is in-charge of infrastructure development in his division, and is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the division. the district magistrate, hence, reports to the divisional commissioner of meerut. the current divisional commissioner of meerut is surendra singh (ias).
gautam budh nagar district administration is headed by the district magistrate (dm) of gautam budh nagar, who is an ias officer. the dm is in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government and oversee the national elections held in the city.
the district magistrate is assisted by one chief development officer, three additional district magistrates/ adm (executive, finance & revenue and law & order), and one city magistrate. the district has divided into three subdivisions named noida sadar, dadri, and jewar each headed by a sub-divisional magistrate (sdm) who reports to the district magistrate. the current dm of gautam buddha nagar (noida) since 30 march 2020 is suhas lalinakere yathiraj (ias).
law enforcement[edit]
in january 2020, the government of uttar pradesh, led by yogi adityanath announced that gautam buddha nagar (noida) and lucknow will have a commissionerate police system, headed by a commissioner of police who shall directly report to the dgp of uttar pradesh police. the commissioner of police (additional dgp rank) is assisted by two additional commissioner of police (deputy igp rank). below them, there are seven deputy commissioner of police/ dcp (sp rank).
noida is divided into three police zones i.e. noida, central noida and greater noida, each of them under a zonal dcp (sp rank). apart from these three zonal dcps, noida police has four other dcp looking after headquarters, traffic, crime, and women safety. below them, there are 16 assistant commissioner of police/ acp (deputy sp rank). the current commissioner of noida police is alok singh, an indian police service (ips) officer.
courts[edit]
the court for noida is situated at district court complex, surajpur greater noida, gautam budh nagar formed in 2012 with 18 courts in function. the court complex at surajpur greater noida is built on more than 30 acres of land. the infrastructure of the court is neat and clean with good size courtrooms.
