north-dum-dum
Education[edit]
education[edit]
the following institutions are located in dum dum:
mrinalini datta mahavidyapith was established by birati shiksha sansad at birati in 1964. it offers honours courses in bengali, english, sanskrit, history, political science, philosophy, education, sociology, geography, journalism & mass communication, economics, anthropology, physics, mathematics, computer science, botany, zoology, accountancy and bba. it also offers general courses in arts, science and commerce, and post graduation in bengali. it caters to the needs of 18,000 students from birati and the surrounding areas. uttar dum dum vidyapith for boys, girls up to class twelve and primary section up to class fourth standard. these were also established by birati siksha samsad in 1954. birati vidyalay for boys and girls. birati high school is a boys-only higher secondary school. being one of the earliest boys schools in north dum dum, it has a very spacious campus facilitating the various academic needs of the science and commerce students. the school has a big library, computer room, chemistry, physics, biology labs and a huge playground for various sports activities. nimta high school at nimta is a boys-only higher secondary school. it was established in 1875. shyamaprasad nagar high school at nimta is a co-educational higher secondary school." nimta jibantosh memorial girls high school is a girls-only, higher secondary school. nimta ishan chandra balika vidyalaya is a girls-only high school. rishi aurobindo memorial academy at p.k.guha road (near airport gate no. 1), is an english-medium co-educational icse school. st. stephen’s school, at r.b.c. road, is a co-educational english-medium school, that has produced toppers in both icse and isc examination. managed by the barracpore diocesan education society, it was established in 1971. it is the main school with 18 branches. indira gandhi memorial high school, at p.k.guha road, is an english-medium coeducational school affiliated to the cbse. it was established in 1996 and has facilities for teaching in classes nursery to xii. birati mahajati vidyamandir for boys' (h.s.). it is located at mahajati nagar in birati. near punjab & sind bank. it is established in 1968 . birati mahajati balika vidyamandir (h.s.). it is located at mahajati nagar in birati. it is the beside of birati mahajati vidyamandir. " rajanikanta shiksha sadan ".this is primary school upto class iv. it is situated at nabanagar, birati .
