north-dum-dum
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]
[interactive fullscreen map] cities and towns in the southern portion of barrackpore subdivision in north 24 parganas districtm: municipal city/ town, ct: census town, n: neighbourhood/ administrative locationowing to space constraints in the small map, the actual locations in a larger map may vary slightly
location[edit]
north dum dum is located at  wikiminiatlas22°39′07″n 88°25′09″e﻿ / ﻿22.6520800°n 88.4190700°e﻿ / 22.6520800; 88.4190700.
north dumdum is bounded by panihati (municipality), teghari, muragachha, chandpur (all three census towns in barrackpore ii cd block) and new barrackpore (municipality) on the north, madhyamgram (municipality) and bidhannagar municipal corporation area on the east, dum dum (municipality) and south dumdum (municipality) on the south and kamarhati (municipality) on the west. although not spelled out explicitly such localities as nimta, birati and durganagar are neighbourhoods in north dumdum municipal area. in this google map [2], published in the website of north dumdum municipality, the outline of the limits of the municipal area is shown. on expanding the map, one can view the neighbourhoods and other location in north dumdum municipality.
96% of the population of barrackpore subdivision (partly presented in the map alongside, all places marked on the map are linked in the full screen map) lives in urban areas. in 2011, it had a density of population of 10,967 per km the subdivision has 16 municipalities and 24 census towns.
for most of the cities/ towns information regarding density of population is available in the infobox. population data is not available for neighbourhoods. it is available for the entire municipal area and thereafter ward-wise.
police station[edit]
nimta police station under barrackpore police commissionerate has jurisdiction over north dumdum municipal area. airport police station and netaji subhas chandra bose international airport police station partly covers an area shown in census maps as part of north dumdum municipality, have been placed under bidhannagar police commissionerate from 2012, along with the entire airport and neighbourhoods through which vip road (kazi nazrul islam sarani) passes.
post offices[edit]
north dum dum is a vast locality with many postal index numbers:
nimta has a delivery sub post office, with pin 700049 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in calcutta region. the only other post offices with the same pin is udaipur.
nilachal has a delivery sub post office, with pin 700134 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in calcutta region.
birati has a delivery sub post office, with pin 700051 in the north presidency division of north 24 parganas district in calcutta region. the only other post offices with the same pin is sultanpur.
kolkata airport has a non-delivery sub post office, with pin 700052 in the kolkata north division of kolkata district in calcutta region. the only other post office with the same pin is kendriya vihar.
durganagar has a non-delivery sub post office, with pin 700065 in the kolkata north division of kolkata district in calcutta region.
