pali-rajasthan
Industries[edit]
industries[edit]
pali has been famous for its textile industries. cotton and synthetic clothes, and yarn are exported to other states of india at a very cheap price. some new industries have also been developed such as those of bangles, marble cutting, marble finishing, etc. there is a cotton mill named maharaja shree umaid mills which is the biggest cotton mill of rajasthan, employing nearly 3000 workers.
one of the biggest composite textile mill of india  'maharaja shri umaid mills' (estt. in the year 1940) is also situated at pali. main production of this mill are cotton, hank yarn etc. which are used to prepare different clothes. main cloth production are cotton,  2* 2 rubia etc.
there are three industrial areas in pali, namely, mandia road industrial area, industrial area phase 1 & 2, and punayata industrial area. mandia road industrial area is the biggest and the oldest of all. industries such as jai mahaveer textiles, shankheshwar corporation, dhan shree fabrics, keshariyaji tex print, mahamantra mills india, maa ambe texofine, mahotsav fabrics, d.pawan fab tex, sunlight industries, kundan tex, k.b shah, nakoda prints, tulsi cotton mills, mayank process, aadeshwar process, shree ganesh fab tex, b.b. shah, shri arihant cloth mills, shree rajaram group of industries, kohinoor, kamal agencies, manidhari impex, sidhi vinnayak petro chem, shree roopmuni industries, vam india organics, vidhya mills (india), vidhya industries pvt ltd., metro industries, vijaya fabrics, manoj textiles, minerwa industries, sikhwal fabrics, mohini process, jov(tex) link, sonu group of industries, lodha fabrics, mega tex print, vinod group of industries, m.b finishing, mahaveer fab tex, bajrang textiles etc. are among well known and reputed textile industries situated at mandia road, pali.  punayata industrial area has been always a question mark on local administration and riico because of its setup and evolution. but in the last few years, punayata area has turned out to be a major landmark for industrialist to set up their new business.
besides this, many more industries are situated in different areas of pali district i.e. leather-based industries, agriculture instruments, chemical industries, cement industry, minerals-based units like stone crushers etc. among these, granite industries have recently flourished due to the easy availability of raw material and favorable geographical location.
however, the problem of pollution is imminent. common effluent treatment plants (cetp) have been established in the last few years to treat the discharged water from various industries.
