panchkula
Geography and climate[edit]
geography and climate[edit]
himalayan expressway, a section of nh5, near panchkula
panchkula district has sub-tropical continental monsoon climate with hot summers, cool winters and monsoon rainfall.it has great variation in temperature (−1 to 43 °c [30 to 109 °f]). sometimes winter frost occurs during december and january. the district also receives winter rains from the western disturbance. the rainfall is mostly received in the monsoon. morni hills constitute the highest point of the district as well as of haryana. the ghaggar is the only perennial river, which is very shallow outside of the monsoons. the mountains and hills of kasauli are clearly visible from panchkula.
generally, the slope of the district is from north east to south west and in this direction, most of the rivers/streams rain-fed torrents flow down and spread much gravel and pebbles in their beds. only the sirsa river, in kalka tehsil flows towards the north-west. the soils in the district are mainly light loam.
the underground water in the district is generally fresh and suitable for domestic and irrigation purposes. the underground water level is generally high in the southern parts and low in north and north-east which is hilly tract. the district lies in the himalayas boundary fault zones and earthquakes of moderate to high intensity have occurred in the past.
average temperature[edit]
spring: it lasts from february-end to early-april. temperatures vary from (max) 13 to 20 °c (55 to 68 °f) and (min) 5 to 12 °c (41 to 54 °f). autumn: in autumn (from september-end to mid-november.), the temperature may rise to a maximum of 30 °c (86 °f). temperatures usually remain between 10 to 22 °c (50 to 72 °f) in autumn. the minimum temperature is around 6 °c (43 °f). summer: the temperature in summer (from mid-april to june-end) may rise even above 40 °c (104 °f). temperatures generally remain between 30 and 39 °c (86 and 102 °f). monsoon: during monsoon (from early-july to mid-september), panchkula receives moderate to heavy rainfall and sometimes heavy to very heavy rainfall (generally during the month of august or september). usually, the rain-bearing monsoon winds blow from south-west/south-east. mostly, the city receives heavy rain from the south (which is mainly a persistent rain) but it generally receives most of its rain during monsoon either from north-west or north-east. the maximum amount of rain received by the city of panchkula during monsoon season is 195.5 mm (7.70 in) in a single day. winter: winters (november-end to february-end) are mild but it can sometimes get quite chilly in panchkula. average temperatures in the winter remain at (max) 5 to 14 °c (41 to 57 °f)and (min) −1 to 5 °c (30 to 41 °f). rain usually comes from the west during winters and it is usually a persistent rain for 2–3  days with sometimes hail-storms.
