panchkula
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
employment[edit]
panchkula it park (also known as haryana state industrial and infrastructural development corporation technology park) is the state of art infrastructure to facilitate information technology in the city. it spreads over 74 acres developed by hsiidc situated in sector 22 on foothills of shivalik hills or outer himalayas and on the banks of ghaggar river. it is well connected to delhi, haryana, punjab and himachal pradesh.
tourism[edit]
there are various tourist attractions in and around panchkula including:
patiala temple, constructed 1840 ad by maharaja of patiala, within the mansa devi temple complex in panchkula
mata mansa devi mandir is one of the most prominent temples in north india and is dedicated to goddess mansa devi, a form of shakti. bhima devi temple site museum nicknamed khajuraho of north india for its erotic sculptures, comprises the restored ruins of an ancient hindu temple dating from between 8th and 11th century ad. nada sahib is a sikh gurudwara in the panchkula district of the indian state of haryana. situated on the banks of the ghaggar-hakra river in the sivalik hills. morni, the hill resort at morni hills, an offshoot of the sivalik hills, are about 45 kilometres (28 mi) from the city. the hills were named for queen morni, who is said to have ruled this city. pinjore gardens, also known as yadavindra gardens, are about 20 km (12 mi) from the city, and cover a total area of 100 hectares (250 acres). the work of creating the gardens began in the seventeenth century. pinjore gardens is the venue for an annual mango festival. the garden houses a mini zoo, historic places, japanese garden, nursery and a number of picnic spots. according to hindu theology, the pandava brothers rested in pinjore during their exile. national cactus and succulent botanical garden and research centre a 7 acres (2.8 ha) cactus garden in the center of panchkula, was established in 1987, and is known for its rare and endangered species of indian succulent plants. kaushalya dam is an earth-filled barrage dam on kaushalya river in pinjore. it is an important wetland that is home to many endangered migratory birds. kaushalya dam bir shikargah wildlife sanctuary, khol hi-raitan wildlife sanctuary, pheasant breeding centre, morni, jatayu conservation breeding centre, pinjore, pheasant breeding centre, berwala.
