panipat
Landmarks[edit]
landmarks[edit]
hemu's samadhi sthal[edit]

main article: hemu's samadhi sthal
the wounded hemu was captured by shah quli khan in the second battle of panipat and carried to the mughal camp at shodapur on jind road at panipat. according to badayuni, bairam khan asked akbar to behead hemu so that he could earn the title of ghazi. akbar replied, "he is already dead, if he had any strength for a duel, i would have killed him." after akbar's refusal hemu's body was denied honour by the mughal battle tradition and was unceremoniously beheaded by bairam khan. hemu's head was sent to kabul where it was hung outside the delhi darwaza while his body was placed in a gibbet outside purana quila in delhi to terrorise his supporters, who were mainly his subjects, both the muslims and hindus.
ibrahim lodhi's tomb[edit]

main article: ibrahim lodhi's tomb
it was one of sher shah suri's dying regrets that he could never fulfill his intention of erecting a tomb to the fallen monarch ibrahim lodhi. much later, in 1866, the british relocated the tomb which was just a simple grave during construction of the grand trunk road and added a platform to it with an inscription highlighting ibrahim lodhi's death in the battle of panipat.
babur's kabuli bagh mosque[edit]

main article: kabuli bagh mosque
the garden of kabuli bagh along with the kabuli bagh mosque and a tank were built by babur after the first battle of panipat to commemorate his victory over ibrahim lodhi. some years later when humayun defeated sher shah suri near panipat, he added a masonry platform to it and called it 'chabutra" fateh mubarak, bearing the inscription 934 hijri (1557 ce). these buildings and the garden still exist under the name of kabuli bagh called so after babur's wife – mussammat kabuli begum.
kala amb memorial
kala amb[edit]

main article: kala amb
according to tradition, the site 8 km from panipat and 42 km from karnal, where sadashiv rao bhau commanded his maratha forces during the third battle of panipat was marked by a black mango tree (kala amb) which has since disappeared. the dark colour of its foliage was probably the origin of the name. the site has a brick pillar with an iron rod and the structure is surrounded by an iron fence. the site is being developed and beautified by a society presided over by the governor of haryana.
