panipat
History[edit]
history[edit]
statue of the hindu emperor of delhi in 1556 hem chandra vikramaditya, at panipat, who died in the second battle of panipat

main articles: battle of panipat (1526), battle of panipat (1556), and battle of panipat (1761)
panipat district was carved out from the erstwhile karnal district on 1 november 1989. on 24 july 1991 it was again merged with karnal district. on 1 january 1992, it again became a separate district.
panipat was the scene of three pivotal battles in indian history. the first battle of panipat was fought on 21 april 1526 between ibrahim lodhi, the afghan sultan of delhi, and the turko-mongol warlord babur, who later established mughal rule in northern indian subcontinent. babur's force defeated ibrahim's much larger force of over one lakh (one hundred thousand) soldiers. this first battle of panipat thus ended the 'lodi rule' established by bahlul lodhi in delhi. this battle marked the beginning of mughal rule in india.
the second battle of panipat was fought on 5 november 1556 between the forces of akbar and hem chandra vikramaditya, the last hindu emperor of delhi. hem chandra, who had captured states like agra and delhi defeating akbar's army and declared himself as independent king after a coronation on 7 october 1556 at purana qila in delhi, had a large army, and initially his forces were winning, but suddenly he was struck by an arrow in the eye and fell unconscious. on not seeing him in his howdah on the back of an elephant, his army fled. the unconscious hemu was carried to akbar's camp where bairam khan beheaded him. his head was sent to kabul to be hanged outside delhi darwaza, and his torso was hanged outside purana quila in delhi. the place of martyrdom of raja hemu is now a famous shrine in panipat.
panipat is listed in the ain-i-akbari as a pargana under delhi sarkar, producing a revenue of 10,756,647 dams for the imperial treasury and supplying a force of 1000 infantry and 100 cavalry. it had a brick fort at the time which was also mentioned.
the third battle of panipat was fought on 14 january 1761 between the maratha empire and the afghan and baloch invaders. the maratha empire forces were led by sadashivrao bhau and the afghans were led by ahmad shah abdali. the afghans had a total strength of 110,000 soldiers, and the marathas had 75,000 soldiers and 100,000 pilgrims. the maratha soldiers were unable to get food because of non-cooperation of other empires of india. the afghans were supported by najib-ud-daula and shuja-ud-daula for the supply of food, and the maratha had pilgrims along with them, who were unable to fight, including female pilgrims. on 14 january, over 100,000 soldiers died resulting in the victory for the afghans. however, after the victory, the afghans facing a hostile north india, retreated to afghanistan to avoid casualties. this battle served as a precursor for the east india company to establish company rule in india as most of north and northwest indian princely states were weakened.
