panihati
History[edit]
history[edit]
there is a legendary belief that maharaja chandraketu of deganga established a garh (fort) at panihati in the 13th century. there is an association of goddess bhawani with the fort. in the early days when river transport was the primary means of communication, panihati was a major trading and business centre, then known as pannyahati (emporium for merchandise). scholars feel that the name has come from the word pannyahatic. panihati is mentioned in several vaishnava padavali literary texts – chaitanya mangal kavya by jayananda and lochandas in the 16th century,  sri chaitanya bhagawat by brindaban das in 1548, bansi bistar by nityannda, vaishnava namdeva by debaki nandan, sri chaitanya charitamritam by krishnadas kabiraj in 1580–1610, bhakti ratnakar and chaitanya chandroday. panihati municipality was established in 1900. this place is said to be visited by sri chaitanya mahaprabhu on his way to puri & later by his close associate nityananda too, due to which gaudiya vaishnavas consider this place holy.
gandhi memorial asram or sodepur khadi pratisthan was established by satish chandra dasgupta in 1921 at panihati. mahatma gandhi himself visited  and stayed there several times in 1939, 1945, 1946 and 1947.
with the partition of bengal in 1947, "millions of refugees poured in from east pakistan." in the initial stages bulk of the refugees were non-agriculturists. a few of them made their own arrangements, but "it was squatters who made the east bengali refugees famous or infamous." squatting (jabardakhal in bengali) ranged from the forcible occupation of barracks to the collective take-over of private, government and waste land. "this happened as early as 1948 with middle class refugees in the jadavpur area: first on government land and then on private property, leading to violent clashes. having won the battle, the elated squatters named their colony ‘bijaygarh’, the fort of victory." by 1949, there were 40 such colonies in jadavpur, kasba, santoshpur, garia and behala, in the south-eastern part of the city, and 65 in the dum dum and panihati zone in the north. subsequently squatters colonies also came up along the west bank of the hooghly and by 1950, there were 150 such colonies. it has to be borne in mind that the squatters were in a way “self-settlers” in the absence of adequate official arrangements for rehabilitation. within a very short time the refugees (quite often with government/ administrative support) not only found a place to stay but developed a society with markets, schools, temples and sometimes even colleges, hospitals and recreational centres. efforts have been made in more recent years to regularise land/property rights in the refugee colonies.
