panvel
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
panvel is an important junction point as many major highways meet and pass through the city. the mumbai-pune expressway, sion-panvel expressway, nh 4b and nh 66 start from here while nh 4 passes through panvel. roads of new panvel are maintained by cidco while those in panvel by pmc. new panvel, being developed by cidco, has well planned and wide lane major roads and even the arterial roads are of two lanes leading to a single direction. old panvel has relatively less maintained roads which are congested due to lack of planning on part of the pmc.
proposed di.ba international airport[edit]
the di.ba international airport or "nmia" is planned to be built in the panvel-kopra area in the city of navi mumbai through public-private partnership (ppp) — with the private sector partner getting 74% equity and airports authority of india (aai) & maharashtra government, through cidco, holding 13% each. the international civil aviation organisation (icao) has already given techno-feasibility clearance to the airport and the central cabinet has cleared it. the project is at global tendering stage.
railway[edit]
panvel railway station is one of the most important junctions on central railway. harbour line from mumbai csmt, central line from diva / karjat, western dedicated freight corridor from jnpt and the line from roha meet at panvel. panvel railway station comes under mumbai division of central railway. panvel is one of the terminating stations of the harbour line of the mumbai suburban railway. it is also considered as an entry point for trains bound for konkan railway from northern and western india. platforms 1,2,3 & 4 are for suburban trains while platforms 5,6 & 7 are for main line trains. nine pairs of daily express trains, 13 pairs of non-daily express trains and 12 daily commuter (passenger) trains stop here. also, the ernakulam – hazrat nizamuddin duronto express has a technical halt at panvel for crew change, refueling and catering. in addition, panvel handles 116 suburban trains which go to destinations mumbai csmt, wadala road, goregaon and thane. the station also handles a sizeable amount of freight trains. panvel is considered equivalent to mumbai for trains which skip mumbai. the trains run on diesel traction and alternating current (the tracks to konkan are not electrified south of roha), and panvel is a refueling point for their locomotives. in addition to refueling, panvel has a huge number of parcel bookings, and most trains stop for periods varying from 5 minutes to 20 minutes for technical purposes. panvel also handles crew and locomotive change for a few long-distance passenger / freight trains.
diesel locomotives has the facility to fill the diesel. good connectivity for pune, ahmedabad and delhi on daily basis. daily trains for thiruvananthapuram, kochi, mangalore, pune, goa and delhi along with ahmedabad. also there are trains for patna, bikaner, chennai, bhavnagar, veraval, vasco etc. sampark krantis and rajdhanis have halt here along with garib rath and double decker. some of the daily trains are 12051/52 jan shatabdi express (dadar – madgaon), mandovi express, pragati express, etc. now all the local trains will be 12 coach as now the current line is ac current. indian railways's central railway division conducted an inaugural run of an ac local train from panvel to thane on 30 january 2020 at 3:30 pm on an open path towards thane. on its return journey, the train ran from thane to panvel on an open path. the ac local started its regular commercial services from 31 january 2020. the ac local also starts from nerul and vashi to thane. on the day of its inaugural run, many travellers boarded the train as they weren't aware that a separate ticket was needed to board the ac local. the train was even made to halt at one station as one door got blocked and wasn't opening. this further delayed the train's as well as other trains' timings on the route. this all happened despite the train had security guards and ticket checkers. following this incident, the number of security guards and ticket checkers was nearly doubled and awareness was being created amongst travellers.
panvel pnvl   next main station towards mumbai:thane  next small station towards mumbai:kalamboli  central railway  next small station from mumbai:chikhale  next main station from mumbai:karjat   distance from mumbai (cst) = 54 km   next main station towards mumbai:thane  next small station towards mumbai:kalamboli  konkan railway  next small station from mumbai:somatane  next main station from mumbai:roha
autorickshaws[edit]
there are many autorickshaws in panvel. the minimum fare is rs. 10 in share-autos, but rs. 30 for sole-hire. this is high as compared to the rs. 18 in other parts of navi mumbai, mumbai & thane. even though there is now the cheaper cng fuel, autos – because of political support – are not controlled by the rto. there is no "fare chart" defined by rto for panvel, unlike other parts of navi mumbai. this needs to improve for the benefit of commuters.
bus[edit]
there are two main bus stands in panvel – st stand on the national highway and nmmt stand near railway station. the st buses are available from panvel to karjat, alibaug, pen, roha, khopoli, thane, bhiwandi, kalyan, dombivli, badlapur, dadar, uran as well as beyond mumbai metropolitan region. nmmt buses are available from panvel to thane, vashi, dadar, world trade centre (cuffe parade) and inner areas of panvel city. panvel is the second busiest bus station in the state after latur. it is the major bus station for the state as it a junction for konkan and pune routes buses. there is a heavy rush on ganpati festival, diwali festival and may vacations.
nmmt/kdmt/kmt route no. route   nmmt 24 panvel rly stn (w) to thane rly stn (w)   nmmt 49 belapur rly stn to karjat bus stn via panvel   nmmt 50 panvel rly stn (w) to kopar khairane bus stn   nmmt 58 belapur rly stn to khopoli via panvel   nmmt 73 panvel rly stn (w) to kalyan rly stn (w)   nmmt 75 panvel rly stn (w) to sai nagar   nmmt 76 panvel rly stn (w) to karanjade sector 06   nmmt 77 panvel rly stn (w) to shantivan nere   nmmt 103 panvel rly stn (w) to dadar (hindmata)   nmmt ac 103 panvel rly stn (w) to dadar (hindmata)   nmmt ac 106 panvel rly stn (w) to world trade centre via dadar   nmmt ac 111 panvel rly stn (w) to world trade centre via dadar   nmmt ac 115 panvel rly stn (w) to world trade centre via dadar   nmmt ac 126 panvel rly stn (w) to borivali rly stn (e) via ghodbunder road   kdmt 20 panvel rly stn (w) to kalyan rly stn (w) via taloja midc   kdmt 70 panvel rly stn (w) to dombivli rly stn (w)   kmt 2 khopoli to panvel s.t. stand   kmt 3 khopoli to vashi bus stand
