panvel
Industries[edit]
industries[edit]
panvel in navi mumbai city, is surrounded by some major maharashtra industrial development corporation (midc) managed regions like patalganga, taloja, nagothane, roha, khopoli, bhiwandi. some of the indian industry majors like larsen & toubro limited, reliance, hindustan organic chemicals ltd.,isro's propellant complex., ongc, ipcl are based around panvel providing mass employment. the jnpt port is also located near panvel. new sez declared by government are coming around panvel.
karnala fort[edit]

main article: karnala fort
karnala fort is a hill fort in raigad district about 10 km from panvel city. currently it is a protected place lying within the karnala bird sanctuary. it was a fort of strategic importance as it overlooked the bor pass which connected the konkan coast to the interior of maharashtra (vidharba) and was the main trade route between these areas. it lies between pen and panvel near shirdhon village. the fort is 370 m above mean sea level.
karnala bird sanctuary[edit]

main article: karnala bird sanctuary
at the bottom of the fort there is a famous karnala bird sanctuary karnala is 65 km away from mumbai, 120 km away from pune and 13 km away from panvel. the sanctuary is around 25 m above mean sea level. maharashtra government declared this 4.5 km region as the bird sanctuary in 1968–69. in the sanctuary one can find around 150 species of birds, such as the red vented bulbul, indian grey hornbill, owl, paradise fly catcher.
shirdhon[edit]

main article: shirdhon
vasudeo balwant phadke was born on 1845-11-04 in shirdhon village of panvel taluka based in raigad district in maharashtra state. the house and his belongings are preserved there.
gadeshwar dam[edit]
gadeshwar reservoir
during the monsoon, the gadeshwar dam overflows. the place can be reached by entering new panvel and via the sukhapur-nere road.  panvel is also famous for watermelons, which can be found abundantly in and around the city and the old mumbai–pune highway.
matheran[edit]

main article: matheran
matheran is a hill station and a municipal council in the raigad district in the indian state of maharashtra.  it is a hill station in karjat tahsil and is also the smallest hill station in india. it is located on the western ghats range at an elevation of around 800 m (2,625 feet) above sea level. it is located around 90 km from mumbai, and 120 km from pune. matheran's proximity to many metropolitan cities makes it a popular weekend getaway for urban residents. the matheran mountain can be easily viewed from certain areas in panvel. one can trek matheran from dhodani village in panvel. the name matheran means "forest on the forehead" (of the mountains).
beth el synagogue[edit]
situated on m.g. road, panvel, it is the only synagogue in panvel and is visited by both jews and non-jews. it is a tourist place and part of the indian heritage.
ballaleshwar pali[edit]

main article: ballaleshwar pali
ballaleshwar (lit.: "ballal's lord") temple is one of the eight temples of lord ganesha. among ganesha temples, ballaleshwar is the only incarnation of ganesha that is known by his devotee's name. it is located in the village of pali which is at a distance of 30 km from karjat in the raigad district. it is situated between fort sarasgad and the river amba. this is 11 km.from nagothane.
varadvinayak, mahad[edit]

main article: varadvinayak
varadvinayak, also spelt as varadavinayaka, is one of the ashtavinayak temples of the hindu deity ganesha. it is located in mahad village situated in khalapur taluka near karjat and khopoli of raigad district, maharashtra, india. the temple was built (restored) by peshwa general ramji mahadev biwalkar in 1725ad. there is an nmmt bus no. 58 from belapur to khopoli which halts at mahad.
