parbhani
Education[edit]
education[edit]

see also: list of educational institutions in parbhani district
in the fields of academics, the city is known mainly for the agriculture university, and because of the university it is also known for the preparation of competitive exams for civil services like maharashtra public service commission, and union public service commission.
agricultural university[edit]

main article: vasantrao naik marathwada agricultural university
vasantrao naik marathwada agricultural university
the history of agriculture research in parbhani dates back to pre-independence era. it began with the commencement of "main experimental farm" of erstwhile nizam state in 1918. however, agricultural education was available only at hyderabad but crop research centres for sorghum, cotton, fruits among few others existed in parbhani.
the first college of agriculture was established in this region at parbhani in 1956 by hyderabad state government just before the maharashtra state reorganization. the current day vasantrao naik marathwada agricultural university (vnmau) was established on 18 may 1972 as "marathwada agriculture university" to fulfill the regional aspirations of agrarian growth, with further responsibilities to provide education in agriculture and allied fields, and to undertake research and facilitate technology transfer in marathwada region. it is one of the only four agricultural universities in the state of maharashtra.
since the 1970s, parbhani has proved itself as the hub of educational, research, and extension activities. the famous 'gaorani' cotton, a breed of indian cotton, is the result of research facilities at parbhani. the university was renamed after the name of former chief minister of maharashta, vasantrao naik, in 2013.
"college of veterinary and animal sciences" is located on the campus of vnmau which is one of the constituent veterinary colleges coming under the authority of maharashtra animal and fishery sciences university, nagpur from 2000. earlier this college was established in 1972 as a part of marathwada agriculture university.
colleges[edit]
some of the notable colleges in the city are but not limited to: late haribai warpudkar polytechnic college parbhani p.d. jain homoeopathic medical college which was established 1918,
saraswati dhanwantari dental college, rajiv gandhi college of agriculture, and food technology, beleshwar institute of nursing, sitaramji mundada marathwada polytechnic college, dnyanopasak college of arts, commerce, science, and technology, sharda mahavidyalaya, yeshwant college of information technology, bioinformatics and biotechnology, dr. zakir hussain college, karmayogi dada jr college and godavari shikshan prasarak mandal's b.raghunath arts, commerce and science college. the shri shivaji college in the city hosts a multitude of courses including arts, commerce, science, law, diploma in engineering, engineering and management, and diploma in pharmacy.
schools[edit]
some of the prominent junior colleges and schools from the city are:dnyansadhna junior college , gandhi vidyalaya, parbhani, bal vidya mandir high school and jr. college, nvs marathwada high school, shree shivaji junior college of arts, commerce, science, and vocational science, dnyanopasak junior college of arts, commerce, and science ,also there are few cbse school around like podar international, dr. zakir hussain high school and jr. college.
