parbhani
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
rail[edit]
panoramic photo of parbhani railway station, taken at dawn.
the transport system of the city is largely dependent on rails. parbhani railway station is a railway junction situated on secunderabad–manmad section of south central railway zone. the town has connectivity to major cities of maharashtra, such as mumbai, pune, nagpur, nanded, aurangabad, nashik and kolhapur. it is also connected to other indian cities like new delhi, bangalore, hyderabad, chennai, ajmer, bhopal, amritsar, allahabad, rameshwaram, tirupati and visakhapatnam. parbhani junction has many facilities, such as baggage check, metal detectors, vip lounge, parking, atms, atvm (automatic ticket vending machines), canteen (rail aahar), fruit stalls, book stalls, indian post (bhartiya daak), foot overbridges, water for passengers, milk dairy, television, wifi network (54mbit/s), etc.
bus[edit]
central bus station of parbhani connects parbhani to other states of india, such as andhra pradesh, telangana, karnataka, gujarat and madhya pradesh. there are multiple daily buses of private operators and msrtc parbhani division between parbhani to other metropolitan cities within maharashtra, and although at less frequency, there are buses to metropolitan cities from other states mentioned above.
parbhani bus port is under construction in cbs parbhani.
roads[edit]
roundabout at chattrapati shivaji statue on national highway.
newly constructed stadium road
national highway 61 old numbering nh 222, which connects the states telangana and maharashtra, passes through the town, which makes it have connectivity to mumbai, nanded. the nh 61 paves its way into national highway 3 at kalyan. these highways open further connectivity options for parbhani, making it to connect with north-eastern cities of indore, jhansi, agra and north-southern cities like varanasi, nagpur, adilabad, nizamabad, hyderabad, bangalore and kanyakumari.
parbhani roads
air[edit]
on 31 december 1998 state government approved to construct an airport in parbhani. which was later stalled on 1 november 2001. this project is currently shelved. the location for airport was never decided.
"auto rikshaw" (three wheelers) is only public transport available in the city. during the yearly urus of turabul haq dargah, first fortnight of february month, the municipal corporation starts daily city buses across all major areas/neighborhoods of parbhani city.
