pathankot
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
pathankot is well connected by rail and road with the rest of the country.  pathankot is connected by a vast network of private and public-sector bus services to other cities in punjab, himachal pradesh, delhi, haryana, jammu and kashmir. important destinations include delhi, manali chandigarh, jammu, dharamshala, dalhousie and amritsar. pathankot is used as a gateway for chamba and kangra valley in himachal pradesh and for various locations in jammu and kashmir like jammu city mansar lake, srinagar, udhampur, holy cave at amarnath, patni top and holy cave of mata vaishno devi (katra) 155 km away from pathankot.
one can take an auto rickshaw or a cycle rickshaw.
traffic management is poor in the city. no traffic lights are there in the city.
by air[edit]
pathankot airport is a domestic airport serving pathankot with scheduled flight operations to/from new delhi by alliance air under the udan scheme. the nearest international airport, however is located in amritsar.
train[edit]
it has direct train links with delhi, jammu and other indian cities. all trains going to jammu pass through pathankot cantt station. the important trains include rajdhani, swaraj express, pooja express, shri shakti express. super fast trains do not enter pathankot station in city. the distance from pathankot junction & pathankot cant railway station is just 4 km.
pathankot railway station under a-category. pathankot is a major railroad junction. lines from amritsar (2 hrs) and delhi (8 hrs) merge here, and all services to jammu (2 hrs) pass through. in addition to pathankot station itself, there is a second station called chakki bank renamed pathankot cantt just 4 km away, which serves some express trains that do not stop in pathankot station. nowadays the majority of the jammu trains stop only at pathankot cantt railway station and not at pathankot railway station.
pathankot is also served by the narrow-gauge kangra valley railway (a.k.a. kangra toy train) built by the british, which crawls 128 km through stunning scenery to joginder nagar via palampur and kangra (near dharamsala). however, the luxury kangra queen services were terminated in 2003, leaving about six departures daily of slow, often packed second class trains, taking over six hours. bookings for these can only be done locally at pathankot station. some of these trains run to baijnath paprola and a few to joginder nagar. the main stations on this line include kangra and palampur, although dalhousie and dharmasala are not on the line. the town is the lower terminus of the kangra valley railway, thereby connecting the mountainous regions of western himachal pradesh to the network of indian railways.
bus[edit]
maharana pratap inter state bus terminal pathankot. it's close to the pathankot junction railway station. public buses to dharamshala dalhousie take 3–4 hours. while buses to amritsar take 3 hours. dalhousie famous destination for honeymoon couples is at just 80 km from pathankot. the famous hindu pilgrimage vaishno devi is just 160 km from pathankot. chandigarh is 4–5 hours away. it is well connected with bus services from punjab roadways, haryana roadways, himachal roadways j&k transport, and private ac volvo buses.
one can stop over in pathankot en route to gurdaspur(35 km), mukerian (40), joginder nagar (149 km), dharamshala (88 km), dalhousie (100 km), amritsar (108), palampur (112 km), chamba (100 km) & jammu (100 km), hoshiarpur (100 km), kangra (86 km), jalandhar (108 km), srinagar (400 km) all in different directions from pathankot via jalandhar-srinagar national highway (nh-44), dabwali-pathankot national highway (nh-54) and pathankot-mandi national highway (nh-154).
