pathankot
Tourist places[edit]
tourist places[edit]
pathankot city is surrounded by both the shivalik range, part of which makes up the foothills of the himalayas, and the river chakki. places near pathankot include shahpur kandi with a hanging rest house, ranjit sagar dam which is the highest gravity dam in asia. madhopur (madhopur, punjab) head works which date back to the mughal era. head works of upper bari doab, shahpur kandi are the attractions of this area. keshopur chhamb is home to many migratory birds and is only major natural wetland in the state.
there is a fortress called the nurpur fort built by the pathania rajputs, more than 900 years ago. the temple is also built there named brij raj swami devoted to lord krishna and mira bai, the only place where idols of both are worshipped. it was damaged due to the earthquake which struck in 1905 a.d., 25 km from pathankot.  it is 25 km away from pathankot. jugial township, is located 15 km (approx) from pathankot. this place has greenery all around and one shri laxmi narayan mandir which is the biggest among the nearby areas. there is also singh sabha gurudwara near shri laxmi narayan mandir. a hydraulic research station at the upper bari doab canal is situated at malikpur, pathankot which is 7 km from pathankot, where various models of dams and irrigation canals are made before actual work starts upon them. dalhousie is snowy in winter, and nearby khajjiar has been described as an "indian switzerland" due to its scenery and activities such as balloon riding, paragliding, and horseback riding. for religious trips like jwala ji (130 km), chintpurni (130 km), pathankot is a place to rest before heading to the hill route the next morning. a grand ranjit sagar dam (earthen dam made of mud and not concrete) is a 100 km water reservoir. chinmayya temple (swami chinmayya nand) is on the way to yol, india camp (100 km). this is the place where the german soldiers (pow) were kept in confinement after the second world war by the british.
the union ministry for forests, environment and climate change has given the long-awaited signal to develop the twin islands of kalara and palangi, located in the midst of the ranjit sagar dam lake, as world class tourist spots.
