patiala
Tourist attractions[edit]
tourist attractions[edit]
kali devi mandir[edit]
the murti of maa kali at the shri kali devi temple, patiala. the temple was commissioned by the sikh ruler of patiala, maharaja bhupinder singh in 1936.
kali devi temple is a hindu temple dedicated to maa kaali. the temple was built by the sikh ruler of the patiala state, maharaja bhupinder singh, who financed the building of the temple in his capital and oversaw its installation in 1936. legend has it that the maharaja built the temple to protect the city from flooding and performed annual sacrifice at the temple. bhupinder singh ruled the princely state of patiala from 1900 to 1938. he brought the 6-ft statue of divine mother kali and paawan jyoti from bengal to patiala and offered the first bali (sacrifice) of a water buffalo to the temple. because of the temple's beautiful structure, it has been declared a national monument. this large complex attracts devotees, hindu and sikh, from distant places.
a much older temple of raj rajeshwari is also situated in the center of this complex. the temple is situated opposite the baradari garden at mall road. devotees offer mustard oil, daal (lentils), sweets, coconuts, bangles, and chunnis, goats, hens, and liquor to the divine mother here. as an average estimate, devotees offer more than 60,000 liquor bottles during navratras alone, which distributed to the beggars sitting outside the temple, and goes into a 'sharab kund' built on the temple's premises.
gurdwara dukh niwaran sahib[edit]
gurdwara dukh nivaran sahib, patiala
according to local tradition, supported by an old handwritten document preserved in the gurdwara, one bhag ram, a jhivar of lehal, waited upon ninth guru of sikhs guru tegh bahadur during his sojourn at saifabad (now bahadurgarh). he requested that the guru might be pleased to visit and bless his village so that its inhabitants could be rid of a severe and mysterious sickness that had been their bane for a long time.
the guru visited lehal on magh sudi 5, 1728 bikram/24 january 1672 and stayed under a banyan tree by the side of a pond. the sickness in the village subsided. the site where guru tegh bahadur had sat came to be known as dukh nivaran, literally meaning eradicator of suffering. devotees have faith in the healing qualities of water in the sarovar attached to the shrine. it is still believed that any illness can be cured by 'ishnaan' on five consecutive panchami. it is in the vicinity of patiala bus station.
gurdwara moti bagh[edit]
gurudwara moti baag is situated in the outerskirts of patiala city. when shri guru teg bahadur started his journey towards delhi, he came here via kiratpur sahib, bharatgarh sahib, roap makar, kabulpur, etc. saint saif ali khan was a great follower of guru, to fulfill his wish guru sahib came to his place saifabad (bahadur garh). the holly guru stayed here for 3 months. saif ali khan served the guru with great devotion. in the daytime guru teg bahadur used to meditate on the place inside the qila (fort) and at night time, he would come here. from here the guru left for samana and stayed in the haveli of muhamad bakhshish. from there onward, guru sahib left towards cheeka via karhali, balbera.
bahadurgarh fort[edit]
the bahadurgarh fort is 6 kilometers away from patiala city. it is situated on patiala-chandigarh road. the fort was constructed by mughal nawab saif khan in 1658 a.d where guru teg bahadur visited him and later renovated by a sikh ruler maharaja karam singh in 1837. the construction of the entire fort was completed in eight years. a sum of ten lakh rupees was spent on its construction. it covers an area of 2 km (0.77 sq mi). the fort is enclosed within two rounded walls and a moat. the circumference of the fort is slightly over two kilometers.
the name bahadurgarh fort was given by maharaja karam singh as a tribute to the sikh guru teg bahadur who stayed here for three months and nine days before leaving for delhi where he was executed by aurangzeb in 1675 ce. the fort consists of a historical gurdwara sahib (a sikh temple) named gurdwara sahib patshai nauvin. this gurudwara shows the fine sikh architecture. this gurudwara is controlled by the shiromani gurdwara prabhandak committee. people visit this gurudwara on the occasion of the festival of baisakhi on 13 april, every year.
qila mubarak complex[edit]
a gate of the qila mubarak in patiala, built in the 18th century
the qila mubarak complex stands on a 10-acre ground in the heart of the city and contains the main palace or qila androon (literally, 'inner fort'), the guesthouse or ran baas and the darbar hall. outside the qila are the darshani gate, a shiva temple, and bazaar shops which border the streets that run around the qila and sell precious ornaments, colorful hand-woven fabrics, 'jootis' and bright 'paradis'.
it was the principal residence of the patiala royals until the construction of old moti bagh palace.
the entrance is through an imposing gate. the architectural style of the palace is a synthesis of late mughal and rajasthani. the complex has ten courtyards along the north-south axis. each courtyard is unique in size and character, some being broad, others very small and others mere slits in the fabric of the building. though the androon is a single interconnected building, it is spoken of as a series of palaces. each set of rooms makes a cluster around a courtyard, and each carries a name: topkhana, qila mubarak, sheesh mahal, treasury, and prison. ten of the rooms are painted with frescoes or decorated intricately with mirror and gilt.
in a tiny portion of the complex is a little british construction with gothic arches, fireplaces made of marble, and built-in toilets perched on the mughal rajasthani roof. burj baba ala singh has had a fire smouldering ever since the time of ala singh, along with a flame brought by him from jwalaji. every year it's decorated beautifully for the heritage festival.
sheesh mahal[edit]
the suspension bridge at sheesh mahal, patiala
a part of the old moti bagh palace built in the 19th century by the maharajas is the famous sheesh mahal, literally meaning the palace of mirrors. the mahal contains a large number of frescoes, most of which were made under his highness maharaja narinder singh. a lake in front of the palace adds to the beauty. lakshman jhula, a bridge built across the lake, is a famous attraction. a museum housing the largest collection of medals from the world collected by his highness maharaja bhupinder singh is here.
currently, the museum along with the main building is closed for public viewing because of renovation. however, tourists can access the surroundings of the mahal along with the lakshman jhula.
baradari gardens[edit]
rajindra kothi, patiala located in the baradari gardens, now a heritage hotel
the baradari gardens, the garden with 12 gates, are in the north of old patiala city, just outside sheranwala gate. the garden complex, set up during the reign of maharaja rajindera singh, has extensive vegetation of rare trees, shrubs, and flowers dotted with impressive colonial buildings and a marble statue of maharaja rajindera singh. it was built as a royal residence with a cricket stadium, a skating rink, and a small palace set in its heart named rajindera kothi. the gardens include a museum building with collections of maharaja ranjeet singh.
after extensive restoration, it opened as a heritage hotel run by neemrana hotels group in 2009. it is punjab's first heritage hotel. it is near press club patiala which was established in 2006 and now headed by parveen komal, president.
royal dining hall
press club patiala is situated at barandari garden near 20 no. railway crossing. headed by mr. parveen komal president www.pressclubpatiala.com. it was established by captain amrinder singh chief minister of punjab in 2006.
12 royal gates of patiala[edit]
darshani gate - main entrance of quilla mubarak sanouri gate lahori gate sherawala gate sunami gate sirhindi gate ghalori gate safabadi gate top khana gate nabha gate samania gate rajindera gate
national institute of sports[edit]
founded in 1961, netaji subhas national institute of sports (nis) is asia's largest sports institute in princely city of patiala. the institute was renamed netaji subhas national institute of sports in january 1973.
netaji subhash national institute of sports (nsnis), patiala
nis is housed in the old moti bagh palace of the erstwhile royal family of patiala, which was purchased by the government of india after indian independence. today, several sports memorabilia, like a has (doughnut-shaped exercise disc), weighing 95  kg, used by the great gama for squats, major dhyan chand's gold medal, from 1928 amsterdam olympics, and pt usha 1986 seoul asiad shoes, are housed at the national institute of sports museum.
