patna
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
roads[edit]

bihar's longest flyover from jagdeo path mor to sheikhpura mor in bailey road, patnachiriyatand flyover at patna, one of the many new ones that have come up in the city recently.radio taxisdigha–sonpur bridge connecting patna with north bihar.
patna is about 100 km south of national east – west highway corridor. the nh 30, nh 31 and nh 2 passes through the city. the ashok rajpath, patna-danapur road, bailey road, harding road and kankarbagh old bypass road are the major corridors. patna was one of the first places in india to use horse-drawn trams for public transport. public transportation is provided for by buses, auto rickshaws and local trains. auto rickshaws are said to be the lifeline of the city. bsrtc has started city bus service on all major routes of patna. app based cab service is available within city.   patna is about 70.02km away from chhapra
air transport[edit]
jay prakash narayan airport, patna
patna airport known as lok nayak jayaprakash narayan international airport is classified as a restricted international airport. the arrival of several low-cost carriers and a number of new destinations have caused a growth in air traffic in recent years, as has an improvement in the situation with regard to law and order. for the period april to december 2009 the airport ranked first in a survey of 46 airports in the country in terms of percentage growth of domestic passengers as well as domestic aircraft movement. the airport authority of india (aai) has proposed to develop a civil enclave at bihta air force station to serve as the new airport for patna. the military airfield lies 40 kilometres (25 mi) southwest of patna, in bihta.
railways[edit]
patna junction railway station, patna
patna is served by several railway stations within. the patna junction railway station is the main railway station of the city, and one of the busiest railway stations in india. patna lies in between new delhi and kolkata on howrah–delhi main line, which is one of the busiest rail routes in india. patna junction is directly connected to most of the major cities in india. the city has four additional major railway stations: rajendra nagar terminal (adjacent to kankarbagh), patliputra junction (near bailey road), danapur (near western outskirts) and patna sahib (in patna city area). danapur is the divisional headquarters of east central railway zone's danapur railway division. patna is well connected with neighbouring gaya, jehanabad, bihar sharif, rajgir, islampur through daily passenger and express train services. and also connected with jamalpur junction and munger. india's longest road-cum-rail bridge, digha–sonpur bridge has been constructed across river ganges, connecting digha, patna to pahleja ghat in sonpur. the bridge was completed in 2015, it is 4.55 kilometres (2.83 mi) long and therefore the second longest rail-cum-road bridge in india, after bogibeel bridge in assam.
the city is served by several major road highways and state highways, including national highways 19, 30, 31, and 83. pataliputra bus terminal is an upcoming isbt. asia's longest river bridge, the mahatma gandhi setu (built 1982), is in patna and connects the city to hajipur across the ganga. in recent times, the bridge has been witnessing major traffic chaos and accidents due to exceeding number of vehicles passing over it and regularly overloading the structure. a new six lane road bridge across the ganges parallel to mahatma gandhi setu is proposed which would connect kacchi dargah in patna city to bidupur in vaishali district, which will be the longest bridge in india after completion. patna is well connected with roads to various major cities of bihar like hajipur, munger, jamalpur, bhagalpur, gaya, and purnia.
patna is 1,015 kilometres (631 mi) east from delhi, 1,802 kilometres (1,120 mi) north east from mumbai,1,527 kilometres (949 mi) north from hyderabad and 556 kilometres (345 mi) north west from kolkata. luxury bus service between patna and several neighbouring cities is provided by the bihar state tourism development corporation and the bihar state road transport corporation. auto rickshaws are a popular mode of transportation. prepaid auto services operated by an all-women crew was started in 2013 in patna, which is the first of its kind in india. radio taxi services are also available within city limit as well as outskirts. there are private options such as ola cabs.
metro[edit]
patna metro is an under-construction rapid transit system for the city. it would be owned and operated by state run patna metro rail corporation. it will be constructed on public private partnership (ppp) mode, estimated to cost ₹140 billion (us$2 billion). it will have 5 lines with a total planned length of 60 kilometres (37 mi) km, which will be built in 3 phases. patna monorail project covering the municipal area is also underway. recently the central government approved patna metro rail project comprising two corridors (danapur - khemnichak and patna junction - pataliputra bus terminal). according to government, the project will be completed until 2025 with an estimated cost of rs. 133657.7 million.
river port on national waterway 1 at gai ghat, patna
the ganges – navigable throughout the year – was the principal river highway across the vast indo-gangetic plain. vessels capable of accommodating five hundred merchants were known to ply this river in the ancient period; it served as a major trade route, as goods were transported from pataliputra to the bay of bengal and further, to ports in sri lanka and southeast asia. the role of the ganges as a channel for trade was enhanced by its natural links – it embraces all the major rivers and streams in both north and south bihar. in recent times, inland waterways authority of india has declared the stretch of river ganges between allahabad and haldia national inland waterway and has taken steps to restore and maintain its navigability. the national waterway-1, the longest waterway in india, stretches 1620 km in the river ganga from allahabad to haldia via varanasi, munger, bhagalpur passes through patna. this national waterways has fixed terminal at patna.
