patna
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
this section may require copy editing.  (december 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)

main article: economy of patna
maurya lok is one of the oldest and major shopping area of the city
patna has long been a major agricultural hub and centre of trade. its most active exports are grain, sugarcane, sesame, and medium-grained patna rice. there are several sugar mills in and around patna. it is an important business and luxury brand centre of eastern india. the economy of patna has seen sustained economic growth since 2005. the economy has been spurred by growth in the fast-moving consumer goods industry, the service sector, along with green revolution businesses. in 2009, the world bank stated patna as the second best city in india to start up a business. as of 2011-12, gdp per capita of patna is ₹1,08,657 and its gdp growth rate is 7.29 per cent. patna is the 21st fastest growing city in the world and the fifth fastest-growing city in india, and is expected to grow at an average annual rate of 3.72%. the major business districts of the city are bander bagicha, exhibition road, gandhi maidan marg, frazer road, indrapuri and maurya lok.
earlier patna was an international trading hub and a major textile center. going back to the 19th century when silk factory was set up here, so many foreign traders came to visit it and have some income. after the independence the economy was still stable. after the independence many vegetables and vegetable oils were manufactured in the city. until 1980s up and down in economy was there. but till the 1990s, when liberalisation came in india, patna didn't receive any global funds and foreign investments. the trading and economic environment were fully destroyed. there were many fertiliser plants and sugar mills. but to week ecosystem, company saw loses and it was also get closed.
a large number of manufacturing companies hero cycles, britannia industries, pepsico, sonalika tractors and ultratech cement have come with there manufacturing plants in patna metropolitan area. world's second largest leather cluster is in fatuha at patna. patna is also emerging as an it based economy. tata consultancy services-patna got operational in 2019 at its new office. many business park are introduced to the city.
state bank of india- patna regional office at east gandhi maidan marg       software technology park of india, patna       reserve bank of india's regional office at south gandhi maidan marg, patna
