patna
Utility services[edit]
utility services[edit]
bhootnath road tv tower broadcasts programming to patna
groundwater fulfills the basic needs of the people, administered by patna jal parishad under patna municipal corporation. the public water supply system comprises 98 tube wells that pump water directly to the distribution mains. around 23 overhead reservoirs of which only the one's at agam kuan, gulzarbagh press, guru gobind singh hospital and high court serves the city. the sewerage system in patna was set up in 1936. at present, there are four sewage treatment plants at saidpur, beur, pahari and karmali chak. in 2019, the central government has started the process nirmal ganga, which is to build new sewerage infrastructure at patna's karmalichak as well as in barh, naugachia and sultanganj. the new infrastructure will be capable of preventing the flow of 67 million litre of sewage into ganga.
as of 2011, the city's electricity consumption is about 601 kwh per capita, even though the actual demand is much higher. electricity supply to the city is regulated and distributed by the south bihar power distribution company limited managed by bihar state power holding company limited (the holding company and a successor company of erstwhile bihar state electricity board). the city forms the patna electricity supply unit (pesu) circle, which is further divided into two wings namely patna east (consists kankarbagh, patna city, gulzarbagh, bankipore, rajendra nagar divisions) and patna west (consists danapur, new capital, pataliputra, gardanibagh, dak bungalow divisions).
direct–to–home (dth) is available via dd free dish, airtel digital tv, dish tv, tata sky, videocon d2h, sun direct and reliance digital tv. cable companies include darsh digital network pvt. ltd., siti maurya cablenet pvt. ltd etc. the conditional access system for cable television was implemented in march 2013.
patna comes under the patna telecom district of the bharat sanchar nigam limited (bsnl), india's state-owned telecom and internet services provider. both global system for mobile communications (gsm) and code division multiple access (cdma) mobile services are available. apart from telecom, bsnl also provides broadband internet service. among private enterprises, bharti airtel, reliance jio, reliance gsm/cdma, idea cellular, aircel, tata teleservices (tata docomo, virgin mobile and tata indicom), telenor (formerly uninor & now acquired by bharti airtel), vodafone and videocon telecom are the leading telephone and cell phone service providers in the city.
patna was the second indian city, after bangalore, which offered free wifi connectivity to its citizens in february 2014. by surpassing the previous record-holder, beijing in china, patna's wifi zone is the world's longest free wifi zone, which covers a 20-km stretch from nit patna on ashok rajpath to danapur.
