patna
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]

main article: tourism in patna
golghar was originally built to serve as a granary for the british east india company army during the famine of 1786. it now features an observation deck overlooking the ganges and the city.
sabhyata dwar in patna
patna is home to many tourist attractions and it saw about 2.4 million tourists (including day visitors) in 2005. tourists visiting the city accounted for 41% of the total number of tourists visiting bihar although bodh gaya was the most popular destination for foreign visitors. the cultural heritage of bihar is reflected in its many ancient monuments. kumhrar and agam kuan are the sites of the ruins of the ashokan pataliputra. didarganj yakshi remains as an example of mauryan art.
takht sri patna sahib is one of the five takhts of sikhism and consecrates the birthplace of the tenth guru of the sikhs, gobind singh. there are five other gurdwaras in patna which are related to different sikh gurus; these are gurdwara pahila bara, gurdwara gobind ghat, gurdwara guru ka bagh, gurdwara bal leela, gurdwara handi sahib. and prakash punj. padri ki haveli, high court, golghar, sultan palace and secretariat building are examples of british architecture. gandhi maidan is a historic ground in patna where several freedom movement rallies took place. nealy built buddha smriti park near patna junction is also becoming a major tourist attraction.
the patna planetarium (indira gandhi planetarium) is in patna's indira gandhi science complex. it claims to be one of the largest planetariums in asia and to attract a large number of tourists. the sanjay gandhi jaivik udyan (patna zoo) is at bailey road, raj bhawan, rajbanshi nagar, and includes over 300 mammals, 300 birds and 450 species of reptiles as of january 2019.
in 2015, the bihar government has built a state-of-the-art art landmark museum in patna at a cost of approximately ₹530 crores on a site of 13.9 acres at bailey road. 5 firms were shortlisted for the architectural design, of which the japanese firm maki and associates was chosen. it is now completed and opened for all. completed in may 2018, the sabhyata dwar was built with a mauryan-style architecture. it was opened to the general public in december 2018.
in 2014, the bihar government laid the foundation of samrat ashok international convention centre. it is expected to use more steel than used in raising eiffel tower and indira gandhi international airport. construction of dr. a.p.j abdul kalam science city began in february 2019. the eco park is in jawaharlal nehru marg. it has more than 3,000 varieties of plants and includes several theme parks, a restaurant and a boat trip zone.
