patna
Education[edit]
education[edit]

see also: list of schools in patna, list of educational institutions in patna, and education in india
indian institute of technology patna at bihta, one of the premier institutes of engineering and research in india.
patna college, established 1863, is considered to be the oldest institution of higher education in bihar.
schools in patna are either government-run schools or private schools. the schools are affiliated to bihar school examination board (bseb), council for the indian school certificate examinations (cisce), national institute of open schooling (nios) or the central board of secondary education (cbse) boards. a number of bengali medium schools also thrive in patna. hindi and english are the primary languages of instruction. a 2012 survey found 1,574 schools: of these, 78% were private unaided schools (most of them at affordable cost), 21% were government schools and 1% were private aided.
under the 10+2+3/4 plan, students complete ten years of schooling and then enroll in schools that have a higher secondary facility and are affiliated to the bihar state intermediate board, the all-india council for the indian school certificate examinations (cisce), the nios or the cbse, where they select one of three streams: arts, commerce, or science. this is followed by either a general degree course in a chosen field of study or a professional degree course, such as law, engineering and medicine.
patna has important government educational institutions like patna university, anugrah narayan college, chanakya national law university, aryabhatta knowledge university, indian institute of technology patna, bakhtiyarpur college of engineering, national institute of technology, patna, patna science college, patna women's college, patna law college, bihar veterinary college, j.d. women's college, birla institute of technology, patna, patna medical college hospital, rajendra memorial research institute of medical sciences, nalanda medical college hospital, indira gandhi institute of medical sciences, mahavir cancer sansthan, all india institute of medical sciences patna, national institute of fashion technology patna, chandragupta institute of management, development management institute, national institute of electronics & information technology, patliputra university.
patna university was established in 1917 and is the seventh oldest modern university in the indian sub-continent. patna also has a variety of other universities, as well as many primary and secondary schools.
nalanda university (also known as nalanda international university) is a newly established university in rajgir, around 100 kilometres (62 mi) from patna. the university, created as a revival of an ancient centre of learning at nalanda, began its first academic session on 1 september 2014. it will attract students from across the globe.
