patna
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
magahi folk singers
gandhi maidan (shown above) lies in the heart of patna and is the site for most political and social functions in the city.
the mahavir mandir is a famous temple in patna.
patna's native language is magahi or magadhi a language derived from the ancient magadhi prakrit, which was created in the ancient kingdom of magadha, the core of which was the area of patna south of the ganges. it is believed to be the language spoken by gautama buddha. patna has a vibrant bengali culture too with many bengali stalwarts including the first chief minister of post-independence west bengal, bidhan chandra ray, being born here. the numerous bengali speaking patnaites have contributed massively into fine arts, culture, education and history of bihar in general and patna in particular. however, magahi was the official language of the mauryan court, in which the edicts of ashoka were composed.
the name magahi is directly derived from the name magadhi prakrit, and educated speakers of magahi prefer to call it "magadhi" rather than "magahi".
patna has many buildings adorned with indo-islamic and indo-saracenic architectural motifs. several well-maintained major buildings from the colonial period have been declared "heritage structures"; others are in various stages of decay. established in 1917 as the bihar's first museum, the patna museum (पटना संग्रहालय) houses large collections that showcase indian natural history and indian art. the khuda bakhsh oriental library and sinha library are historic public libraries of patna.
several theatres are in or near the central part of the city, including the bhartiya nritya kala mandir, the rabindra parishad, premchand rangshala and the kalidas rangalaya, which is home to the bihar art theatre. kalidas rangalaya also hosts the patliputra natya mahotsav, a dance festival. but in the last two decades, the popularity of commercial theatres in the city has declined.
the patna school of painting or patna qalaam, some times also called company style, is an offshoot of the well-known mughal miniature school of painting, which flourished in bihar during the early 18th to the mid-20th centuries. the practitioners of this art form were descendants of hindu artisans of mughal painting who facing persecution under the mughal emperor aurangzeb and who found refuge, via murshidabad, in patna during the late 18th century. the patna painters differed from the mughal painters, whose subjects included only royalty and court scenes, in that they included as subjects bazaar scenes, scenes of indian daily life, local dignitaries, festivals and ceremonies, and nature scenes. the paintings were executed in watercolours on paper and on mica, but the style was generally of a hybrid and undistinguished quality. it is this school of painting that inspired the formation of the college of arts and crafts, patna, under the leadership of shri radha mohan, which is an important centre of fine arts in bihar.
some well known dishes of bihari cuisine include sattu paratha (parathas stuffed with roasted gram flour), "sattu ka sharbat" (a spiced drink with roasted gram flour as main ingredient), chokha (spicy mashed potatoes), fish curry, bihari kebab, postaa-dana kaa halwaa, malpua, dal pitha (similar to momos), kheer makhana (fox nut) and thekua/khajuria (a type of snack).
street foods such as samosa, chaat, jalebi, litti chokha, phuchka (a deep-fried crêpe with tamarind sauce), south indian and chinese cuisine are favourite among patnaites. taj hotel patna is under construction at budh marg lodipur.
bihari women have traditionally worn cotton sari but shalwar kameez and other western attire are gaining acceptance among younger women. western attire has gained wide acceptance among the urban men, although the traditional dhoti and kurta are seen during festivals. chhath, also called dala chhath, is a major ancient festival in bihar. it is celebrated twice a year: once in the summer, called the chaiti chhath, and once about a week after deepawali, called the kartik chhath. durga puja, held in september–october, is patna's another important festival; it is an occasion for glamorous celebrations. among the city's other festivals, are saraswati puja, eid, holi, christmas, vishwakarma puja, makar sankranti, raksha bandhan and rath yatra. cultural events include the patna book fair, patna sahib mahotsav, the patna film festival, bihar diwas, rajgir mahotsav, vaishali mahotsav and the sonepur cattle fair in neighbouring towns.
a murti, or representation, of the goddess durga shown during the durga puja festival       people celebrating chhath festival the 2nd day at morning a tribute to the rising holy god sun
