patna
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of patna

see also: pataliputra, history of bihar, and timeline for bihar
ancient era[edit]
traditional buddhist literature attributes foundation of patna 490 bce as ajatashatru, the king of magadha, wanted to shift his capital from the hilly rajagrha (today rajgir) to a strategically chosen place to better combat the licchavis of vaishali. he chose the site on the bank of the ganges and fortified the area. gautama buddha travelled through this place in the last year of his life. he prophesied a great future for this place even as he predicted its ruin due to flood, fire and feud. according to dieter schlingloff, the buddhist accounts may have presented the grandeur of patna as a prophecy and that its wooden fortifications unlike other early historic indian cities indicate that it might be much older than thought but only archaeological excavation and c14 dates of its wooden palisades which is presently lacking may establish this.
mauryan empire[edit]
statue of matrikas found near agam kuan, built by ashoka.
megasthenes, the indo-greek historian and ambassador to the court of chandragupta maurya, gave one of the earliest accounts of the city. he wrote that the city was on the confluence of the rivers ganga and arennovoas (sonabhadra – hiranyawah) and was 14 kilometres (9 mi) long and 2.82 kilometres (1.75 mi) wide. megasthenes, the greek ambassador to india, described the city as the greatest city on earth during its heyday. the shungas ultimately retained control of pataliputra and ruled for almost 100 years. the shungas were followed by the kanvas and eventually by the guptas. a number of chinese travellers came to india in pursuit of knowledge and recorded their observations about pataliputra in their travelogues. one such famous account was recorded by a chinese buddhist traveller fa hien, who visited india between 399 and 414 ce, and stayed here for many months translating buddhist texts. when chinese buddhist monk faxian visited the city in 400 a.d, he found the people to be rich and prosperous; they practised virtue and justice. he found that the nobles and householders of the city had constructed several hospitals in which the poor of all countries, the destitute, the crippled and the diseased can get treatment. they could receive every kind of help gratuitously. physicians would inspect the diseases, and order them food, drink, and medicines.
pataliputra as a capital of the magadha empire.       pataliputra as a capital of maurya empire.  the maurya empire at its largest extent under ashoka the great.       pataliputra as a capital of shunga empire. approximate greatest extent of the shunga empire (c. 185 bce).       pataliputra as a capital of gupta empire. approximate greatest extent of the gupta empire.
gupta and pala empire[edit]
main street of patna, showing one side of the chowk, 1814–15.
city of patna, on the river ganges, 19th-century painting.
in the years that followed, many dynasties ruled the indian subcontinent from the city, including the gupta dynasty and the pala kings. with the disintegration of the gupta empire, patna passed through uncertain times. bakhtiar khilji captured bihar in the 12th century and destroyed everything, and patna lost its prestige as the political and cultural centre of india. guru gobind singh (22 december 1666 – 7 october 1708), the tenth guru of the sikhs, was born as gobind rai in patna to guru teg bahadur, the ninth guru of the sikhs, and his wife mata gujri. his birthplace, patna sahib is one of the most sacred sites of pilgrimage for sikhs.
mughal empire[edit]
the mughal empire was a period of unremarkable provincial administration from delhi. the most remarkable period during the middle ages was under the afghan emperor sher shah suri, who revived patna in the middle of the 16th century. he built a fort and founded a town on the banks of the ganges. sher shah's fort in patna does not survive, although the sher shah suri mosque, built in afghan architectural style, does. mughal emperor akbar reached patna in 1574 to crush the rebellious afghan chief daud khan. one of the navratnas from akbar's court, his official historian and author of "ain-i-akbari" abul fazl refers to patna as a flourishing centre for paper, stone and glass industries. he also refers to the high quality of numerous strains of rice grown in patna, famous as patna rice in europe. by 1620, the city of patna was being described as the "chiefest mart towne of all bengala" (i.e. largest town in bengal) in northern india, "the largest town in bengal and the most famous for trade". this was before the founding of the city of calcutta. mughal emperor aurangzeb acceded to the request of his favourite grandson, prince muhammad azim, to rename patna as azimabad, in 1704 while azim was in patna as the subedar. patna or azimabad did see some violent activities, according to phillip mason, writing in the book "the men who ruled india". "aurangzeb had restored the poll-tax (jazia) on unbelievers and this had to be compounded for. in patna, peacock the chief of the factory was not sufficiently obliging and was seized, forced to walk through the town bare-headed and bare-footed and subjected to many other indignities before he paid up and was released." little changed during this period other than the name. with the decline of the mughal empire, patna moved into the hands of the nawabs of bengal, who levied a heavy tax on the populace but allowed it to flourish as a commercial centre. the mansions of the maharaja of tekari raj dominated the patna riverfront in 1811–12. in 1750, the future nawab of bengal, siraj ud-daulah revolted against his grandfather, alivardi khan, and seized patna, but quickly surrendered and was forgiven.
portuguese empire[edit]
as trade grew, settlements of the portuguese empire expanded to the bengal gulf. since at least 1515 the portuguese were at bengal as traders, and later in 1521 an embassy was sent to gaur to be able to create factories in the region. the bengal sultan after 1534 allowed the portuguese to create several settlements as chitagoong e satgaon. in 1535 the portuguese were allied with the bengal sultan and held the teliagarhi pass 280 km from patna helping to avoid the invasion by the mughals. by then several of the products came from patna and the portuguese send in traders, establishing a factory there since 1580 at least. the products were shipped out down the river until other portuguese ports as chittagoon e satgaoon, and from there to the rest of the empire.
british empire[edit]
during the 17th century, patna became a centre of international trade. in 1620, the english east india company established a factory in patna for trading in calico and silk. soon it became a trading centre for saltpetre. francois bernier, in travels in the mogul empire (1656–1668), says ". it was carried down the ganges with great facility, and the dutch and english sent large cargoes to many parts of the indies, and to europe". this trade encouraged other europeans, principally the french, danes, dutch and portuguese, to compete in the lucrative business. peter mundy, writing in 1632, described patna as "the greatest mart of the eastern region". after the decisive battle of buxar of 1764, as per the treaty of allahabad east india company was given the right to collect tax of this former mughal province by the mughal emperor. patna was annexed by the company in 1793 to its territory when nizamat (mughal suzerainty) was abolished and the british east india company took control of the province of bengal-bihar. patna however continued as a trading centre. in 1912, when the bengal presidency was partitioned, patna became the capital of the british province of bihar and orissa, although in 1936 orissa became a separate entity with its own capital. till date, a major population of bengalis live in patna particularly.
street in patna, 1825 (british, active in india)       golghar at bankipore, near patna, 1814–15
indian independence movement[edit]
people from patna were greatly involved in the indian independence movement. most notable movements were the champaran movement against the indigo plantation and the 1942 quit india movement. national leaders who came from the city include swami sahajanand saraswati; the first president of the constituent assembly of india, dr. rajendra prasad; bihar vibhuti (anugrah narayan sinha); basawon singh (sinha); and loknayak (jayaprakash narayan).
post-independence[edit]
patna remained the capital of bihar after india gained independence in 1947, even as bihar was partitioned again in 2000 when jharkhand became a separate state of the indian union. on 27 october 2013, six people were killed and 85 others were injured in a series of co-ordinated bombings at an election rally for bjp candidate narendra modi. on 3 october 2014, 33 people were killed and 26 injured in a stampede at gandhi maidan during vijaya dashmi celebrations.
