patna
Government[edit]
government[edit]
civic administration[edit]
the civic administration of patna is run by several government agencies and has overlapping structural divisions. at least five administrative definitions of the city are available; listed in ascending order of area, those are: patna division, patna district (also the patna police area), the patna metropolitan region (also known as patna planning area), "greater patna" or prda area, which adds to the pmc area a few areas just adjacent to it and patna municipal corporation area.
city officials      assumed office office source   corporation mayor sita sahu, bjp june 2017 maurya lok    corporation commissioner animesh kumar parashar, ias november 2021 maurya lok    divisional commissioner sanjay kumar agarwal, ias october 2019 near golghar, gandhi maidan    district magistrate dr.chandrashekhar singh, ias january 2021 patna collectorate    senior superintendent of police manavjit singh dhillon, ips january 2022 south gandhi maidan marg
the patna municipal corporation, or pmc, oversees and manages the civic infrastructure of the city's 75 wards, which accommodates a population of 1.7 million as per 2011 census. the municipal corporation consists of democratically elected members, each ward elects a councillor to the pmc. the pmc is in charge of the civic and infrastructure needs of the metropolis.
as patna's apex body, the corporation discharges its functions through the mayor-in-council, which comprises a mayor, a deputy mayor, and other elected members of the pmc. the mayor is usually chosen through indirect election by the councillors from among themselves. the functions of the pmc include water supply, drainage and sewerage, sanitation, solid waste management, street lighting, and building regulation. the municipal commissioner is the chief executive officer and head of the executive arm of the municipal corporation. all executive powers are vested in the municipal commissioner who is an indian administrative service (ias) officer appointed by the state government. although the municipal corporation is the legislative body that lays down policies for the governance of the city, it is the commissioner who is responsible for the execution of the policies. the commissioner is appointed for a fixed term as defined by state statute. the powers of the commissioner are those provided by statute and those delegated by the corporation or the standing committee. as of june 2017, the bjp won pmc mayor seat; the mayor is sita sahu, while the deputy mayor is vinay kumar pappu. the patna municipal corporation was ranked 4th out of 21 cities for best governance & administrative practices in india in 2014. it scored 3.6 on 10 compared to the national average of 3.3. the revenue district of patna come under the jurisdiction of a district collector (district magistrate). the collectors are in charge of the general administration, property records and revenue collection for the central government, and oversee the national elections held in the city. the bihar urban infrastructure development corporation limited (buidco) and the patna metropolitan area authority, are responsible for the statutory planning and development of patna metropolitan region. patna metropolitan area authority was established in 2016. it is the superseding agency for the former patna regional development authority (prda), which was dissolved in 2006. in addition to city government, numerous commissions and state authorities—including the ministry of tourism, the bihar health department, the bihar water resources department, national ganga river basin authority, bihar state pollution control board and the bihar public service commission—play a role in the life of patnaites. as the capital of bihar, patna plays a major role not only in state politics but in central politics as well.
in october 2016, bihar cabinet approved the patna master plan 2031 which envisages development of a new airport at bihta. as of august 2015, the area of patna city (along with its urban agglomeration) is 250 square kilometres (97 sq mi). patna master 2031 is the second master plan of city which has been passed ever, after the last plan was approved for 1961-1981. patna master plan covers six urban local bodies - patna municipal corporation, danapur nagar parishad, phulwarisharif nagar parishad, khagaul nagar parishad, maner nagar panchayat and fatuha nagar parishad. the new master plan proposed to increase the area of patna city to 1,167 square kilometres (451 sq mi) to transform it as a metropolitan city. 5 satellite towns have also been proposed in the master plan at bihta, naubatpur, punpun, fatuha and khusrupur.
patna has been selected as one of the hundred indian cities to be developed as a smart city under government of india's flagship smart cities mission. with the grade of a smart city, patna will have highly up-to-date and radical provisions like uninterrupted electric supply, first-rate traffic and transport system, superior health care and many other prime utilities. under this scheme, the city will use digital technology that will act as the integral mechanism of the aforesaid facilities and thereby further elevate the lifestyle of the citizens. a special purpose vehicle company named the patna smart city limited has been formed to implement the smart city projects. on 22 november 2017, eptisa servicios de ingenieria sl of spain was chosen as the project management consultant.
