pimpri-chinchwad
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
air[edit]

main articles: pune international airport and chhatrapati sambhaji raje international airport
pune international airport
the air gateway is the pune international airport located at lohegaon which is about 19 km (12 mi) east of the neighborhood. it is operated by the airports authority of india. in addition to domestic flights to all major indian cities, the airport serves international direct flights to dubai (operated by air india express) and to frankfurt (operated by lufthansa). as of 2021, it is the 2nd busiest airport in the state and 13th busiest airport in india. the airport is awarded as best airport by hygiene measures in asia-pacific in 2020 by airports council international.
due to the limited expansion options available, the airport will not be able to cope with the growing demand for air traffic into pune. hence, a greenfield airport for the pune metropolitan region has been proposed. the government of maharashtra has entrusted the responsibility to maharashtra airport development company (madc) for executing the pune international airport project. probable sites for this project had earlier included areas around talegaon dabhade and saswad near pune. an area between chakan and rajgurunagar, around the villages of chandus and shiroli was under consideration. however, due to land acquisition issues, a new site has been proposed. the greenfield airport will be located near the villages of ambodi, sonori, kumbharvalan, ekhatpur-munjawadi, khanwadi, pargaon memane, rajewadi, aamble, tekwadi, vanpuri, udachiwadi, singapur near saswad and jejuri in purandar taluka of pune district in the indian state of maharashtra. the proposed airport in purandar will be spread over 2,400 hectares. this airport will also boost trade from pune and neighbouring districts as it will have its own dedicated cargo terminal.
public transport[edit]
public transport modes in pcmc limits include suburban railway, bus and rainbow brts services operated by pmpml and auto rickshaws. pune metro, an urban mass rapid transit system is under construction in the twin cities. uber and ola cabs also provide vehicle for hire services in the city.
road[edit]

empire estate flyoverravet bridgegrade separators on the nh 48nashik phata flyover, pune's 1st two tier flyover
it is well connected to neighbouring cities via several highways. it has a 633-km long extensive network of roads connecting its various neighbourhoods. the nh 48 runs throughout the city and serves as the main connecting link for the pcmc and pmc. after the mumbai–pune expressway was opened in 2002, this road came to be known as old mumbai–pune road. it starts in the suburb of shivajinagar (earlier bhamburde) and passes through the suburbs of khadki cantonment, bopodi, dapodi, kasarwadi, pimpri, chinchwad, nigdi, dehu road cantonment, kivale, mamurdi, gahunje, talegaon dabhade, and vadgaon maval all the way up to mumbai.the nh 60 originates at nashik phata at kasarwadi is another important road passes through the suburbs of kasarwadi, bhosari, chikhli, moshi, chimbali, and chakan all the way up to nashik. the giant metrewave radio telescope in khodad is off this road. the pimpri-chinchwad link road connects the suburbs of pimpri and chinchwad, as one of the alternative roads to mumbai–pune road. the mumbai pune expressway that originates at kiwale just outside the city, is india's first 6-lane wide concrete, access-controlled tolled expressway. it spans a distance of 94.5 km connecting mumbai, the capital of maharashtra state and the financial capital of india, with pune, the cultural and educational capital of maharashtra. the expressway, which was fully operationalized in 2002, introduced new levels of speed and safety in automobile transportation to indian roads. it is one of india's busiest roads.
a ring road is being planned for the convenience of heavy traffic.
bus service[edit]

rainbow brts terminus at bhosarirainbow brts terminus at chinchwad
until 2007, pcmc, pune served by its own public transport bus service provider, the pimpri chinchwad municipal transport, pune. on 19 october 2007, it was merged with the pune municipal transport, pune that served it's historic neighbourhood of pune to form the pune mahanagar parivahan mahamandal limited (pmpml; lit. pune metropolitan transport corporation ltd.). pmpml runs buses on 371 routes that cover a radius of 20 km around the city of pune, india. it also runs services on brt corridors under the brand name rainbow brts. as of may 2018, there are two operating brt corridors in pcmc limits with a combined length of 22.5 km, while work is underway on three other corridors with a total length 28 km. although the brts project has been deemed a failure in the historic pmc, pcmc claims that the two brt corridors, sangvi-kiwale and nashik phata-wakad, have seen a rise in ridership after they became operation in 2015. the maharashtra state road transport corporation operates buses from its main station at vallabh nagar, pimpri to all major cities and towns in maharashtra as well as in the neighbouring states. private companies also run bus services throughout india.
rail[edit]

main articles: pune railway division and pune suburban railway

pune suburban trainakurdi railway station
pcmc, pune is served by five railway stations, chinchwad, akurdi, pimpri, kasarwadi and dapodi, on the pune suburban railway as well as the mumbai dadar–solapur sections of the indian railways (central zone). local trains (emus) connect pcmc, pune to its historic neighbourhood of pune and the hill station of lonavala, while daily express trains connect it to mumbai. daily express trains through pune junction connect the city to other parts of the country. pune suburban railway, connecting pcmc, pune to it’s historic core and its suburbs in pune district, maharashtra. it is operated by central railway (cr). the system operates on two routes, pune junction–lonavala and its part pune junction–talegaon. 18 trains operate on pune junction–lonavala route and 5 trains operate on pune junction–talegaon route.
metro[edit]

main article: pune metro
pune metro near pcmc bhavan
pune metro, a mass rapid transit system, is under construction and expected to be operational by 2021. the system comprises 3 lines with a total length of 54.58 km. the 16.59 km line 1 pcmc bhavan – swargate will be elevated between pcmc bhavan to range hills, from where it will run underground. line 2 will run from vanaz to ramwadi covering a distance of 14.66 km on an elevated viaduct. lines 1 and 2 are expected to be operational in 2021. the 23.33-km elevated line 3 will run from the rajiv gandhi infotech park in hinjawadi via balewadi to civil court. all three lines will align at the civil court interchange station. the detailed project report (dpr) was prepared for the initial two lines by delhi metro rail corporation which was approved by the state government in 2012 and by the central government in december 2016. out of the two lines, line 1 will run through pcmc limits from pcmc bhavan to dapodi and further to swargate in pune, india. a detailed project report is being prepared for the extension of the line up to nigdi. the project is being implemented by mahametro, a 50:50 joint venture of the state and central governments. line 3 from hinjawadi to civil court, shivajinagar was approved by the state and central governments in january and march 2018, respectively. the 23.3-km line is being implemented by pmrda on a public-private partnership basis and will have a station at wakad in pcmc limits. another metro route connecting hinjawadi to moshi via nashik phata, bhosari is also being contemplated.
personal transport[edit]
rapid urbanization has led to the population of the city to double from 2001 to 2017. in the same period, the number of vehicles has increased of 700%. like its neighbouring pune, motorized two-wheelers dominate the streets. at the rate of 663 vehicles per 1000 residents, a total of 1.57 million vehicles are registered in the city in 2018, of which 1.17 million are two-wheelers. public transportation in the city has not been able to keep up with the demand and is infamous for its unreliability leading to a constant upward trend in the number of vehicles. unsurprisingly, the whopping number of vehicles has led to several problems including air pollution, noise pollution and traffic congestion.
