pimpri-chinchwad
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]
parks[edit]
durga tekdi and bhakti-shakti are one of main public parks in pune. the bhakti shakti garden hosted the second largest national flag of india at 351 ft. the boat club garden, thergaon  on the bank of pawana river hosts kids play area, toy train ride, 15 meter high watch tower, boating and rafting. the city also has a zoo named after nisargakavi bahinabai chaudhari in chinchwad east. a lake garden is also located close to the zoo called the bird valley because of the water birds like cranes which come migrating here. appu ghar also known as indira gandhi udyan is an amusement park located in the pradhikaran area.
pimpri chinchwad science park, pune is one of the latest tourist attraction and activity based science centre of pune region. the science centre houses galleries on different themes of science & technology, activity area, inflatable taramandal and an auditorium. it also has an open air science park spread over 3.5acres. most of the exhibits in the science centre and science park are interactive in nature and visitors can explore science in an entertaining way.
recreation[edit]
there are ten public swimming pools run by pimpri-chinchwad municipal corporation. chapekar wada in chinchwad goan, the residence of the revolutionary chapekar brothers has been restored and is now a memorial cum museum dedicated to their life and displays swords and weapons used by freedom fighters during the struggle for indian independence.
ramkrushna more prekshagruha in chinchwad, acharya atre rangmandir in sant tukaramnagar, ankushrao landage natyagruha in bhosari, nilu phule rangmandir in sangvi are the auditoria in the city.  there is a fort in punawale that was built by and named after the peshwa minister sardar borge. the vaishnodevi temple in pimpri attracts devotees from all over the city.
shopping and malls[edit]
pimpri market is one of the shopping street in pune for clothing, electronics and jewellery. there are several cinema halls as well as shopping malls in the city.
malls[edit]
city one mall elpro city square premier plaza mall spine city mall spot18 xion mall big bazar d-mart
