pimpri-chinchwad
Government and public services[edit]
government and public services[edit]

main articles: pimpri-chinchwad municipal corporation, pune police, and pmrda
on 4 march 1970, the villages of pimpri, chinchwad, bhosari and akurdi merged into a single municipal authority, the pimpri chinchwad municipal council, pune. two years later, the pimpri chinchwad new town development authority, pune was established. its chief objective was to create a planned environment for the working population in the vicinity of their work place. on 11 october 1982, the municipal council was merged with seven surrounding villages and the pcntda area to form the a new municipal corporation (pimpri chinchwad municipal corporation, pune, and it split apart from the haveli taluka to become the 15th and newest of pune district's talukas. the size of the city more than doubled in 1997 (from 84.51 km to 170.51 km.) with the addition (in part or in full) of 18 villages located at the periphery of the pcmc as it existed in 1982. tathawade was added to the city in 2008, bringing the total area of the neighbourhood to 176.41 km.
civic administration[edit]
the pimpri chinchwad municipal corporation, pune is the local governing body. it comprises two branches: the executive branch headed by the municipal commissioner, an ias officer appointed by the government of maharashtra, and an elected deliberative branch, the general body, headed by the mayor. municipal elections are held every five years to elect councilors, popularly known as 'corporators', who form the general body of the pcmc. the corporators, in turn, elect the mayor and the deputy mayor. in the municipal elections held in february 2017, 128 corporators were elected to represent the 32 electoral wards (4 corporators per ward). while the position of the mayor is mostly ceremonial, the chief executive of the city is the municipal commissioner, appointed by the state government. the jnnurm award for best performing neighbourhood, under sub-mission for urban infrastructure and governance, was given to pcmc, pune. the "system of assisting residents and tourist through helpline information" (sarathi), the grievance portal of the city, has gained national recognition and is a role model for other cities.
development agencies[edit]
pune metropolitan region development authority (pmrda), which was on the cards since 1997, was formed on 31 march 2015 and is responsible for the integrated development of the pmr. currently its jurisdiction extends over 7,256.46 km (2,802 sq mi) and includes the municipal corporations of pimpri chinchwad municipal corporation, pune and pune municipal corporation, three cantonment boards, seven municipal councils, 13 census towns and 842 villages.
law and order[edit]
the pcmc police in pune is the law enforcement agency for the neighbourhood of pcmc, pune. it was carved out of pune city police department and took charge on 15 august 2018. it is a division of the maharashtra police and is headed by the police commissioner, an officer of the indian police service.
civic utilities[edit]
the pavana dam located 35 km from pcmc, pune is the sole source of water for the city. the water is lifted at the ravet bund is pumped to the nigdi filtration plant from where it distributed to the entire city. as of 2018, pimpri-chinchwad municipal corporation administration provides around 450 million liters per day (mld) of water to the city. this leads to the generation of around 290 mld of sewage, of which the civic body has capacity to treat only 240 mld at its 13 sewage treatment plants, a problem that has persisted for years. the untreated water is let into the rivers which lead to several health and environmental problems. similar problems in the areas of pmc as well as in the suburban areas, the rivers in the pmr are among the most polluted rivers in the state.
the state owned maharashtra state electricity distribution company limited supplies electricity to the city. the power comes from thermal, hydro, gas and renewable sources such as solar, wind and sugarcane bagasse. bharat sanchar nigam limited (bsnl), owned by the central government, as well as private enterprises such as vodafone, bharti airtel, reliance, idea cellular, aircel, tata docomo, tata teleservices, virgin mobile, and mts india, are the leading telephone and cell phone service providers in the city.
