pondicherry
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of puducherry
pondicherry waterfront circa 1900
puducherry, formerly known as pondicherry, gained its significance as “the french riviera of the east” after the advent of the french colonialization in india. puducherry is the tamil interpretation of “new town” and mainly derived from “poduke”, the name of the marketplace as the “port town” for roman trading in 1st century as mentioned in ‘the periplus of the erythraean sea’. the settlement was once an abode of many learned scholars as evidently versed in the vedas, hence also known as vedapuri.
the history of puducherry can broadly be classified in two periods—pre colonial period and colonial period. the pre-colonial period started with the reign of the pallavas who continued to rule the empire from 325 to 900 ce, then came the chola dynasty for the time period from 900 to 1279 ce, continued by pandya dynasty from 1279 to 1370 ce. during the 14th century, it was under the rule of the naikship of gingee denoting the vijayanagar empire from 1370 to 1614 ce, which was conquered by the sultan of bijapur and he continued for the phase from 1614 to 1638 ce. it was during the period of the sultan when the portuguese and danish merchants used the place as the trading center.
the colonial period started with portuguese as they were the first europeans to trade in textile in 1521 and subsequently with the dutch and the danes in the 17th century.
the prospering trade of puducherry attracted the french and the predominant feature of the town was laid by the french pioneer francois martin in the form of a french settlement in 1674 ce. in 1693, puducherry was captured by the dutch but restored in 1699 ce subsequently with the treaty of ryswick.
the french acquired mahe in 1720, yanam in 1731, and karaikal in 1738. the british captured the city from the french but returned it following the treaty of paris in 1763. this anglo-french war continued until 1814 ce, when finally france had the control over the settlements of puducherry, mahe, yanam, karaikal and chandernagar even during the british period until 1954. it was a reign of one hundred and thirty eight years under french and finally on 31st october, 1954, they left the indian shores following de facto transfer of power.
nearby places such as arikamedu, ariyankuppam, kakayanthoppe, villianur and bahour, which were colonised by the french east india company over a period of time and later became the union territory of pondicherry, have recorded histories that predate the colonial period.
poduke or poduca (a marketplace) was a roman trading destination from the third century bce. poduca has been identified as possibly being arikamedu (now part of ariyankuppam), located about 2 miles (3.2 km) from the modern city of pondicherry. the area was part of the pallava kingdom of kanchipuram in the fourth century. the cholas of thanjavur held it from the 10th to 13th centuries until it was replaced by the pandya kingdom in the 13th century. the vijayanagar empire took control of almost all of the south of india in the 14th century and maintained control until 1638 when they were supplanted by the sultan of bijapur.
in 1674 the french east india company set up a trading centre at pondicherry and this outpost eventually became the chief french settlement in india. the french governor françois martin made remarkable improvements to the city and its commercial ties, facing at the same time strong opposition from the dutch and the english. he entered into extended negotiations with the sultans of golconda through the intercession of several roving french merchants and doctors who were in favour with the sultan. trading in jewelry and precious stones which had become highly fashionable in european courts was one among many activities. five trading posts were established along the south indian coast between 1668 and 1674. the city was separated by a canal into the french quarter and the indian quarter.
on 21 august 1693, during the nine years' war, pondicherry was captured by the dutch. governor of dutch coromandel laurens pit the younger sailed with a fleet of 17 ships and 1600 men from nagapattinam and bombarded pondicherry for two weeks, after which francois martin surrendered it. at the peace of ryswick it was agreed by all parties to return conquered territories and in 1699 pondicherry was handed back to the french.
on 16 january 1761, the british captured pondicherry from the french, but it was returned under the treaty of paris (1763) at the conclusion of the seven years' war. the british took control of the area again in 1793 at the siege of pondicherry amid the wars of the french revolution, and returned it to france in 1814.
prime minister nehru visiting pondicherry a few months after the de facto transfer
on 18 march 1954, a number of resolutions were passed by the municipalities in pondicherry demanding immediate merger with india. some days later, similar resolutions were passed by the municipalities in karaikal. the resolutions had the full support of the french indian councillors, who are popularly known as ministers, and the president of the representative assembly. these municipalities represent roughly 90 percent of the population of the french possessions and they called upon the government of france to take urgent and necessary measures to give effect to the wishes of the people. the government of india had made it clear that the cultural and other rights of the people would be fully respected. they were not asking for the immediate transfer of the de jure sovereignty of france. their suggestion was that a de facto transfer of the administration should take place immediately, while french sovereignty should continue until the constitutional issue had been settled. both india and france would have to make necessary changes in their respective constitutions. all this would take time, while the demand of the people was for immediate merger without a referendum. the government of india was convinced that the suggestion which they made would help to promote a settlement, which they greatly desired. they would gladly enter into negotiations with the government of france on the basis suggested.
on 18 october 1954 in a general election involving 178 people in pondicherry municipal and commune panchayat, 170 people were in favor of merger and eight people voted against. the de facto transfer of the french indian territories from french governance to the indian union took place on 1 november 1954 and was established as the union territory of pondicherry. the treaty effecting the de jure transfer was signed in 1956. however, due to opposition in france, the ratification of this treaty by the french national assembly only took place on 16 august 1962.
