pondicherry
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]

main article: tourism in puducherry
french war memorial
the french consulate in pondicherry.
aayi mandapam (park monument) at bharathi park
pondicherry is a tourist destination. the city has many colonial buildings, churches, temples and statues which, combined with the town planning and french style avenues in the old part of town, still preserve much of the colonial ambiance.
while the sea is a draw for tourists, pondicherry no longer has the sandy beaches that once graced its coastline. the breakwater to the harbour and other hard structures constructed on the shore caused extreme coastal erosion and the sand from pondicherry's promenade beach was permitted to disappear entirely. as a result of the city's seawall and groyne construction, the beaches further up the coast to the north have also been lost.  an enormous deposition of sand has accrued to the south of the harbour breakwater, but this is not a commodious beach and is not easily accessible from the city.
but recently, the government has been taking steps by constructing a reef and re-dosing sand. the sea is accessible by a small patch of land at the promenade beach (goubert avenue). moreover, the beach is one of the cleanest in india and has been selected for blue flag certification.
visitors at the sri aurobindo ashram
the sri aurobindo ashram, located on rue de la marine, is one of the most important ashrams in india, founded by the renowned freedom fighter and spiritual philosopher sri aurobindo. auroville (city of dawn) is an "experimental" township located 8 km (5.0 mi) northwest of pondicherry.
there are a number of old and large churches in pondicherry, most of which were built in the 18th and 19th centuries. a number of heritage buildings and monuments are present around the promenade beach, such as the children's park and dupleix statue, gandhi statue, nehru statue, le café, french war memorial, 19th century light house, bharathi park, governors palace, romain rolland library, legislative assembly, pondicherry museum and the french institute of pondicherry at saint louis street.
puducherry botanical gardens is located south of the new bus stand. chunnambar backwater resort is 8 km (5.0 mi)from pondicherry, along the cuddalore main road. this tropical resort is flanked by a creek on one side.
arulmigu manakula vinayagar devasthanam on manakula vinayagar street is a hindu temple, which houses lord ganesha. sri manakula vinayagar temple was in existence before the french came and settled in pondicherry i.e. before 1666.
sengazhuneer amman temple at veerampattinam village is one of the oldest temples in pondicherry, which is about 7 km (4.3 mi) away from the city centre. the car festival conducted in mid-august is famous in puducherry and other neighboring states. the festival takes place on the fifth friday since the commencement of the tamil month of 'aadi' every year from the date immemorial. the temple car festival is the only one where the head of the state pulls the temple car right from the days of the french rule.
thirukaameeswarar temple is one of the ancient temples located in a rural town called villianur (the ancient name is vilvanallur, from "vilva marangal niraindha nalla vur"), which roughly translates as nice with archery trees is located about 10 km (6.2 mi) away (towards villupuram) from pondicherry. this temple is renowned as periya koil  "big temple". the prime god is lord shiva and the prime goddess is goddess kokilambigai. there are other hindu gods such as murugan, vinayagar, thakshanamoorthy, perumal, bhramah, chandikeshwarar, natarajar, navagrahah, and 63 naayanmaars. the pioneers in this temple say that the age of this temple is about 1000 plus years. it is thought to have been built by one of the chola kings. there is also a huge temple pond. the ther thiruvizha (chariot procession) is celebrated at this temple.
panoramic view of pondicherry
