pune
Education and research[edit]
education and research[edit]

main article: list of educational institutions in pune
main building of pune university
pune has over a hundred educational institutes and more than nine deemed universities apart from the savitribai phule pune university (sppu; formerly university of pune), which is the largest university in the country based on total number of affiliated colleges. higher education institutes attract international students mainly from the middle eastern countries such as iran, and united arab emirates, and also african countries such as ethiopia and kenya. pune is the largest centre for japanese learning in india. other languages taught in the city include german, which is taught at the goethe-institut, and french, which is taught at alliance française. several colleges in pune have student exchange programmes with colleges in europe.
primary and secondary education[edit]

main article: list of schools in pune
the pmc runs 297 primary schools and 30 secondary and higher secondary schools. while it is mandatory for the pmc to provide primary education under state law, secondary education is an optional duty. in the rural and suburban areas of the pmr, public primary schools are run by the pune zilla parishad. private schools are run by education trusts and are required to undergo mandatory inspection by the concerned authorities. private schools are eligible for financial aid from the state government. public schools are affiliated to the maharashtra state board of secondary and higher secondary education (state board). the language of instruction in public schools is primarily marathi, although the pmc also runs urdu, english and kannada medium schools. along with these languages, private schools also offer instruction in hindi and gujarati. private schools vary in their choice of curriculum and may follow the state board or one of the two central boards of education, the cbse or cisce.
jnana prabodhini prashala, located in sadashiv peth, is the first school for intellectually gifted and talented students in india.
tertiary education[edit]

main article: list of educational institutions in pune
most colleges in pune are affiliated to the sppu (savitribai phule pune university). nine other universities have also been established in the city. pune also hosts the military intelligence training school which offers diploma courses in counter intelligence, combat intelligence, aerial imagery and interpretation, among others.
the college of engineering pune, an autonomous institute of the government of maharashtra founded in 1854, is the third oldest engineering college in asia. the deccan education society was founded by local citizens in 1884, including social and political activist bal gangadhar tilak, who was also responsible for founding fergusson college in 1885. the indian law society's (ils) law college is one of the top ten law schools in india. the armed forces medical college (afmc) and b. j. medical college are among the top medical colleges in india. the afmc consistently ranks among the top five medical colleges in india. the film and television institute of india, one of only three indian institutions in the global cilect film school network, is located on law college road. the lalit kala kendra is an undergraduate department of music, dance and drama on the sppu campus that has been operational since 1987. this department features a combination of gurukul and formal education systems. the college of military engineering (cme), the army institute of physical training, and the institute of armament technology are also in pune.
symbiosis international university operates 33 colleges and institutions in the city, including the symbiosis institute of business management, the symbiosis institute of management studies, the symbiosis centre for management and human resource development, the symbiosis law school and the symbiosis institute of international business. they are ranked among the top management and law institutes in the country. the symbiosis institute of computer studies and research is one of the few colleges in india that promotes open source technology.
uwc mahindra college, one of eighteen united world colleges worldwide, and the third is asia, offering the  international baccalaureate (ib) diploma program (dp), is located near pune.
research institutes[edit]
pune is home to a number of governmental and non-governmental research institutes focusing on a wide range of subject areas from the humanities to the sciences. the ministry of defence also runs a number of defence related education, training and research establishments in and around the city. major research centers include:
agharkar research institute (ari) armament research development establishment (arde) armed forces medical college (india) (afmc) army institute of technology (ait) automotive research association of india (arai) bhandarkar oriental research institute (bori) central institute of road transport  (cirt) central water and power research station (cw&prs) centre for development of advanced computing (c-dac) defence research and development organisation (drdo) defence institute of advanced technology (diat) film and television institute of india (ftii) gokhale institute of politics and economics (gipe) high energy materials research laboratory (hemrl) indian institute of science education and research, pune (iiser, pune) indian institute of tropical meteorology (iitm) inter-university centre for astronomy & astrophysics (iucaa) national aids research institute (nari) national centre for cell science (nccs) national centre for radio astrophysics (ncra) national chemical laboratory (ncl) national defence academy (nda) national informatics centre (nic) national institute of bank management (nibm) national institute of construction management and research (nicmar) national institute of virology (niv) national school of leadership (nsl) national insurance academy (nia) research & development establishment (engineers) (r&de(e)) tata research development and design centre (trddc) central bee research and training institute (cbrti)
centre for materials for electronics technology (c-met)

