pune
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
architecture[edit]
shinde chhatri in wanowrie.
historical attractions include the 8th century rock-cut pataleshwar cave temple, the 18th century shaniwarwada, the 19th century aga khan palace, lal mahal and sinhagad fort. shinde chhatri, located at wanowrie, is a memorial dedicated to the great maratha general, mahadaji shinde (scindia). the old city had many residential buildings with courtyards called wada. however, many of these have been demolished and replaced by modern buildings.
a renowned wada in pune is the last residential palace of the peshwa called vishrambaug wada which is currently being renovated by the city corporation. the city is also known for its british raj bungalow architecture and the garden cities movement layout of the cantonment from the early 20th century. landmark architectural works by christopher charles benninger surround the city, including the mahindra united world college of india, the centre for development studies and activities, the ymca retreat at nilshi and the samundra institute of maritime studies.
pu. la. deshpande garden
museums, parks and zoos[edit]
museums in pune include the raja dinkar kelkar museum, mahatma phule industrial museum, deccan college museum of maratha history, dr. babasaheb ambedkar museum, joshi's museum of miniature railway and the pune tribal museum. the central bee research and training institute, houses the honey bee museum which laid the foundation of apiculture in india. pune also houses blades of glory cricket museum which is the biggest cricket museum in the world. the college of military engineering has an archive and an equipment museum; this includes a rail exhibit with a metre-gauge train. the aga khan palace, where mahatma gandhi was interned during the quit india movement, has a memorial dedicated to his wife, kasturba gandhi who died here during the internment.
for a city of its size, pune has very few large public parks and gardens. parks and green spaces in the city include the kamala nehru park, sambhaji park, shahu udyan, peshwe park, saras baug, empress gardens,  and bund garden. the pu la deshpande udyan is a replica of the korakuen garden in okayama, japan. the hanuman hill, vetal hill, and taljai hills are protected nature reserves on hills within the city limits.
the rajiv gandhi zoological park is located in katraj. the zoo, earlier located at peshwe park, was merged with the reptile park at katraj in 1999.
performing arts[edit]
both experimental and professional theatre receive extensive patronage from the marathi community. the tilak smarak ranga mandir, bal gandharva ranga mandir, bharat natya mandir, yashwantrao chavan natya gruha, and sudarshan rangmanch are prominent theatres in the city.
ganesh kala krida rangamanch is the largest indoor theatre in the city, with a seating capacity of approximately 45,000. the sawai gandharva sangeet mahotsav, one of the most prominent and sought-after indian classical music festivals in india, is held in pune every year in december. it commemorates the life and achievements of sawai gandharva. the concept of diwāḷī pahāṭ (lit. diwali dawn) originated in pune as a music festival on the morning of the festival of diwali.
ganpati procession by jnana prabodhini school
festivals[edit]
ganesh festival is widely and publicly celebrated in pune. lokamanya bal gangadhar tilak started the public celebration of the festival as a means to circumvent the colonial british government ban on hindu gatherings through its anti-public assembly legislation in 1892. pandals with ganesh idols are erected all across pune. many ganesh mandals (local organisations) display live or figurine shows called dekhava during the festival. these shows often carry socially relevant messages. processions of ganpati are accompanied by dhol-tasha pathaks (groups who play dhol-tasha percussion instruments). involvement of these pathaks has become a cultural identity of pune with there being over 150 such groups operating in and around pune. jnana prabodhini, a social organisation in pune is widely accredited for founding the tradition of dhol-tasha pathaks.
