pune
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in pune
public transport[edit]

pune suburban railwayrainbow bus rapid transit systempune metromumbai pune expresswaypune airport
public transport in pune includes pune suburban railway, bus services operated by pmpml and auto rickshaws. uber and ola cabs also operate in the city. construction of pune metro, an urban mass rapid transit system, is underway as of 2018.
rail[edit]

main articles: pune railway station and pune suburban railway
pune suburban railway (electric multiple units) (popularly called local trains) connect pune to the industrial city of pimpri-chinchwad and the hill station of lonavala. daily express trains connect pune to mumbai, nashik, ahmedabad, chennai, delhi, hyderabad, nanded, jaipur, raipur, nagpur, visakhapatnam, thiruvananthapuram, kochi, coimbatore, bangalore, allahabad, kanpur, howrah, jammu tawi, vijayawada, darbhanga, goa, gwalior, varanasi, bhubaneswar, ranchi, patna, and jamshedpur. at pune, there is a diesel locomotive shed and an electric trip shed. pune railway station is administered by the pune railway division of central railways.
bus service[edit]

main articles: pune mahanagar parivahan mahamandal limited and rainbow brts
public buses within the city and its suburbs are operated by pune mahanagar parivahan mahamandal limited (pmpml). pmpml operates the rainbow brts system, the first of its kind in india, in which dedicated bus lanes were supposed to allow buses to travel quickly through the city. the project has turned out to be a failure, receiving little patronage from the local citizenry. maharashtra state road transport corporation runs buses from stations in wakdewadi, pune station, and swargate to all major cities and towns in maharashtra and neighbouring states. private companies also run buses to major cities throughout india. in january 2019, pune became the first indian city to adopt e-buses and bhekrai nagar the country's first all electric bus depot. as of november 2019, up to 133 electric vehicles (evs) have been deployed across the city in the first phase of its e-bus programme. the user's group is pune bus pravasi sangh.
metro[edit]

main article: pune metro
pune metro, a mass rapid transit system, is under construction and with 12 km of two lines currently in operation as of 6 march 2022. the detailed project report was prepared for the initial two lines by delhi metro rail corporation which was approved by the state government in 2012 and by the central government in december 2016. two lines, line 1 from pimpri chinchwad municipal corportion building to swargate and line 2 from ramwadi to vanaz, with a combined length of 31.25 kilometres (19.42 mi), are being constructed by mahametro, a 50:50 joint venture of the state and central governments. line 1 will run underground between swargate and range hills be and elevated until pcmc bhavan. line 2 will be completely elevated and will intersect line 1 at the civil court interchange station in shivajinagar.
line 3 between hinjawadi and civil court, shivajinagar was approved by the state and central governments in january and march 2018, respectively. this 23.3-km line is being implemented by pmrda on a public-private partnership basis.
road transport[edit]

main article: list of roads in pune
pune is well-connected to other cities by indian and state highways. national highway 48 connects it to mumbai and bangalore, national highway 65 connects it to hyderabad and national highway 60 connects it to nashik. state highway 27 connect pune to ahmednagar.
the mumbai pune expressway is india's first six-lane high-speed expressway, and it was built in 2002. only four wheeled vehicles are allowed on it. this expressway has reduced travel time between pune and mumbai to a little over two hours. a ring road is planned around the city.
personal transport[edit]
once known as the "cycle city of india", pune has experienced a rapid growth in the number of motorised two wheelers replacing the bicycle. in 2005 the city was reported to have one million two wheelers. the report also stated that the increase in vehicular and industrial activity had led to a 10-fold increase in particulate pollution in some areas of the city. in 2018 the number of vehicles in the city has exceeded its population with 3.62 million total vehicles, 2.70 million being two wheelers. in the fiscal year 2017–18 alone 300,000 new vehicles were registered in the city, two-thirds of them two wheelers.
a revival of cycling in pune with 130 kilometres (81 mi) of cycle tracks built was attempted as a part of the brt system under the jawaharlal nehru national urban renewal mission in 2004. however, a 2011 report revealed that only 88 kilometres (55 mi) of tracks were actually built and most were unusable at the time of the report. under the smart cities mission, app based cycle sharing schemes have been launched in the city since late 2017. the pmc has devised the pune cycle plan with 470 kilometres (290 mi) of cycle tracks planned. cycles are also seen as a possible way of improving last mile connectivity for the metro system.
air[edit]

main article: pune international airport
pune international airport at lohagaon is one of the busiest airports in india. the airport is operated by the airports authority of india. it shares its runways with the neighbouring indian air force base. in addition to domestic flights to all major indian cities, the airport has international direct flights to dubai, operated by air india express, and spicejet. pune international airport at lohegaon was ranked third best in the category of 5-15 million passengers by airport service quality in 2018.
a new international airport has been proposed, due to the limited capacity of the existing airport. a location in the chakan-rajgurunagar area was chosen for the airport, but non-availability of land delayed the project for over a decade. in september 2016 the location was changed to purandar, c. 20 kilometres (12 mi) south of the city. the proposed airport in purandar will be spread over 2,400 hectares. chhatrapati sambhaji raje airport is proposed to serve the city of pune. the greenfield airport will be located near the villages of ambodi, sonori, kumbharvalan, ekhatpur-munjawadi, khanwadi, pargaon memane, rajewadi, aamble, tekwadi, vanpuri, udachiwadi, singapur near saswad and jejuri in purandar taluka of pune district.

