pune
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of pune
early and medieval period[edit]
the circular nandi mandapa at the pataleshwar cave temple built in the rashtrakuta era (753-982)
copper plates dated 858 and 868 ce show that by the 9th century an agricultural settlement known as punnaka existed at the location of the modern pune. the plates indicate that this region was ruled by the rashtrakuta dynasty. the pataleshwar rock-cut temple complex was built during this era. pune was part of the territory ruled by the seuna yadavas of devagiri from the 9th century to 1327. pune was under control of muslim leaders till the late 16th century.
the maratha empire[edit]
pune was part of the jagir (fiefdom) granted to maloji bhosale in 1599 for his services to the nizamshahi (ahmadnagar sultanate). pune was ruled by the ahmadnagar sultanate until it was annexed by the mughals in the 17th century. maloji bhosale's grandson, chhatrapati shivaji maharaj, the founder of the maratha empire, was born at the fort of shivneri, about 90 km from pune. it changed hands several times between the mughals and the marathas in the period 1680 to 1705.
after the destruction of the town in raids by the adil shahi dynasty in 1630 and again between 1636 and 1647, dadoji konddeo, the successor to dhadphale, oversaw the reconstruction of the town. he stabilised the revenue collection and administrative systems of the areas around pune and the neighbouring maval region. he also developed effective methods to manage disputes and to enforce law and order. the lal mahal was commissioned in 1631 and construction was completed in 1640 ad. chhatrapati shivaji maharaj spent his young years at the lal mahal. his mother, jijabai is said to have commissioned the building of the kasba ganapati temple. the ganesha idol consecrated at this temple has been regarded as the presiding deity (gramadevata) of the city.
from 1703 to 1705, towards the end of the 27-year-long mughal–maratha wars, the town was occupied by aurangzeb and its name was changed to muhiyabad. but the name was erased soon after aurangzeb's death.
peshwa rule[edit]
an equestrian statue of peshwa baji rao i outside shaniwar wada. he expanded the maratha empire in north india c. 1730.
in 1720, baji rao i was appointed peshwa (prime minister) of the maratha empire by shahu i, the fifth chhatrapati of the maratha empire. as the peshwa, bajirao moved his base from saswad to pune in 1728, marking the beginning of the transformation of what was a kasbah into a large city. he also commissioned the construction of the shaniwar wada on the right bank of the mutha river. the construction was completed in 1730, ushering in the era of peshwa control of the city. bajirao's son and successor, nanasaheb constructed a lake at katraj on the outskirts of the city and an underground aqueduct to bring water from the lake to shaniwar wada and the city. the aqueduct was still in working order in 2004.
the patronage of the maratha peshwas resulted in a great expansion of pune, with the construction of around 250 temples and bridges in the city, including the lakdi pul and the temples on parvati hill and many maruti, vithoba, vishnu, mahadeo, rama, krishna, and ganesh temples. the building of temples led to religion being responsible for about 15% of the city's economy during this period. pune prospered as a city during the reign of nanasaheb peshwa. he developed saras baug, heera baug, parvati hill and new commercial, trading, and residential localities. sadashiv peth, narayan peth, rasta peth and nana peth were developed. the peshwa's influence in india declined after the defeat of maratha forces at the battle of panipat but pune remained the seat of power. in 1802 pune was captured by yashwantrao holkar in the battle of poona, directly precipitating the second anglo-maratha war of 1803–1805. the peshwa rule ended with the defeat of peshwa bajirao ii by the british east india company in 1818.
historian govind sakharam sardesai lists 163 prominent families that held high ranks and played significant roles in politics, military, and finance in 18th century pune. of these 163 families, a majority(80) were deshastha brahmins, 46 were chitpawan, 15 were chandraseniya kayastha prabhu(ckp) whereas karhade brahmin and saraswat accounted for 11 families each.
british rule (1818 – 1947)[edit]
british government house, ganesh khind (c. 1875)
the third anglo-maratha war broke out between the marathas and the british east india company in 1817. the peshwas were defeated at the battle of khadki (then spelled kirkee) on 5 november near pune and the city was seized by the british. it was placed under the administration of the bombay presidency and the british built a large military cantonment to the east of the city (now used by the indian army). the southern command of the indian army was established in 1895 and has its headquarters in pune cantonment.
the city of pune was known as poona during british rule. poona municipality was established in 1858. a railway line from bombay to the city opened in 1858, run by the great indian peninsula railway (gipr). navi peth, ganj peth (now renamed mahatma phule peth) were developed during the british raj.
centre of social reform and nationalism[edit]
pune was prominently associated with the struggle for indian independence. in the period between 1875 and 1910, the city was a centre of agitation led by gopal krishna gokhale and bal gangadhar tilak. the city was also a centre for social reform led by gopal ganesh agarkar, mahatma jyotirao phule, feminist tarabai shinde, dhondo keshav karve and pandita ramabai. they demanded the abolition of caste prejudice, equal rights for women, harmony between the hindu and muslim communities, and better schools for the poor. mahatma gandhi was imprisoned at the yerwada central jail several times and placed under house arrest at the aga khan palace between 1942 and 1944, where both his wife kasturba gandhi and aide mahadev desai died. savarkar used to study in fergusson college and performed the "holi" of foreign items near mutha river bank.
pune since indian independence[edit]
after indian independence from the british in 1947, pune saw enormous growth transforming it into a modern metropolis. the poona municipal council was reorganised to form the pune municipal corporation (pmc) in 1950. the education sector in the city continued its growth in the post-independence era with the establishment of the university of pune (now, savitribai phule pune university) in 1949, the national chemical laboratory in 1950 and the national defence academy in 1955.
the establishment of hindustan antibiotics in 1954 marked the beginning of industrial development in the hadapsar, bhosari, and pimpri areas. midc provided the necessary infrastructure for new businesses to set up operations. in the 1970s, several engineering companies were set up in the city, allowing it to vie with chennai. in the 1990s, pune began to attract foreign capital, particularly in the information technology and engineering industries. it parks were established in aundh, viman nagar, hinjawadi, wagholi, kharadi and balewadi-baner region. as a result, the city saw a huge influx of people to the city due to opportunities offered by the manufacturing, and lately, the software industries.
the breach in the panshet dam and the resulting flood of 1961 led to severe damage and destruction of housing close to the river banks. the mishap spurred the development of new suburbs and housing complexes. to integrate urban planning, the pune metropolitan region was defined in 1967 covering the area under pmc, the pimpri-chinchwad municipal corporation, the three cantonments and the surrounding villages.
in 1998 work on the six-lane mumbai-pune expressway began; it was completed in 2001. in 2008 the commonwealth youth games took place in pune, which encouraged development in the northwest region of the city. on 13 february 2010 a bomb exploded at the german bakery in the upmarket koregaon park neighbourhood in eastern pune, killing 17 and injuring 60. evidence suggested that the indian mujahideen terrorist group carried out the attack.
21st-century[edit]
pune evolved greatly since indian independence, from notable universities, colleges and management schools, earning it the nickname of the 'oxford of the east', to being one of the most important automobile manufacturing hub. pune is also home to the world's largest vaccine manufacturer, serum institute of india, which during the covid-19 pandemic manufactured around 5,000 vaccine doses every minute.
