pune
Sports[edit]
sports[edit]

main article: sports in pune
maharashtra cricket association stadium
badminton in its modern form originated in pune. the game of badminton was also known as poona or poonah after the then british garrison town of poona where it was particularly popular and where the first rules for the game were drawn up in 1873. (games employing shuttlecocks have been played for centuries across eurasia, but the modern game of badminton developed in the mid-19th century among the british as a variant of the earlier game of battledore and shuttlecock. "battledore" was an older term for "racquet".)
every year women professional tennis players' itf $25k tournament take place at deccan gymkhana club's tennis courts. it also hosts men's itf $15k event. atp 250 maharashtra open annually held at pune. it is india's biggest professional tennis championship and only atp event of india. where top professional tennis players participate.
popular games and sports in pune include athletics, cricket, basketball, badminton, field hockey, football, tennis, kabaddi, paragliding, kho-kho, rowing, and chess. the chhatrapati shivaji stadium in balewadi is the venue for wrestling and other traditional sports. the royal connaught boat club is one of several boating clubs on the mula-mutha river. pune has basketball courts at the deccan gymkhana and at fergusson college. pune skatepark is a skateboarding park built in sahakarnagar, consisting of an eight-foot bowl in a 3,000 square foot flatground. other prominent sporting institutions in pune include the nehru stadium, the pyc hindu gymkhana, the poona golf club and the poona cricket club. the pyc has a long history of excellence in cricket. it is one of the oldest clubs in india and has produced many great cricketers, including d. b. deodhar, vijay hazare and c. k. naid.
the pune international marathon is an annual marathon conducted in pune. the national games of 1994 and the 2008 commonwealth youth games were held in the city at the balewadi stadium. the deccan gymkhana has hosted davis cup matches on several occasions. the 37,000 seating capacity maharashtra cricket association stadium has hosted international cricket – t20s, one day internationals, and a test match. the national education foundation organises enduro3, a cross country adventure race in pune. it is a two- or three-day event with activities including cycling, trekking, river-crossing and rifle shooting. pune race course was built in 1830 on 118.5 acres (0.480 km) of land and is managed by the royal western india turf club. the course has two training tracks and two racing surfaces. the racing season is from july to october and includes the pune derby, the rwitc invitational, the independence cup and the southern command cup. the city hosted the 2009 fivb men's junior world championship.
teams[edit]
the maharashtra cricket team, one of the three teams of the maharashtra cricket association that compete in interstate matches and leagues such as the ranji trophy, is based in the city. pune warriors india (2011–2014) and rising pune supergiant (2016-2017) were the two teams based in pune to play in the indian premier league. poona district football association (pdfa) was established in 1972 and currently has more than 100 registered teams. there were two popular football clubs (now defunct) competing in the i-league from the city: pune fc, and dsk shivajians fc. fc pune city was an indian super league football club in pune. established in 2014, fc pune city became the only professional football club in india to have teams which participated at all levels of professional football; senior team (isl), u-18 team (elite league), u- 16 team, u-14 team and the women's team. the city is home to the pune peshwas, runners-up in the 2015 uba pro basketball league season. pune also has an american football franchise, called the pune marathas, which began playing in the inaugural season of the elite football league of india in 2011 and which plays at the balewadi stadium.
city-based professional clubs   club sport league stadium span   maharashtra cricket team  cricket  ranji trophy  maharashtra cricket association stadium  1934–   pune warriors india  cricket  ipl  maharashtra cricket association stadium  2011–2014   rising pune supergiant  cricket  ipl  maharashtra cricket association stadium  2016–2017   pune fc  association football  i-league  shree shiv chhatrapati sports complex  2007–2016   dsk shivajians fc  association football  i-league  shree shiv chhatrapati sports complex  1987–2017   fc pune city  association football  isl  shree shiv chhatrapati sports complex  2014–2019   pune peshwas  basketball  uba  deccan gymkhana ground  2015-   pune marathas  american football  efli  deccan gymkhana ground  2012-   puneri paltan  kabaddi  pro kabaddi league  shree shiv chhatrapati sports complex  2014
