pune
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

world trade center, punecerebrum it parkembassy techzoneinfosys, punecybercity, magarpatta
pune is a well known manufacturing and industrial center of india. with an estimated nominal gdp of rs. 3,31,478 crores for year 2019-20, pune district is the third largest contributor to the economy of maharashtra, after mumbai and thane. pune has the fifth largest metropolitan economy and the sixth highest per capita income in the country. as per the directorate of economics and statistics (government of maharashtra), the gdp per capita of pune district in 2019-20 was rs. 3,16,848. pune has historically been known as a center for higher education and has been referred to as the educational capital of india. in 2016, it was reported that nearly 500,000 students from across india and abroad study in pune at nine universities and more than a hundred educational institutes. pune is a major manufacturing and industrial hub. in 2014-15, the manufacturing sector provided employment to over 500,000 people.
the city serves as headquarters to many companies. the kirloskar group came to pune in 1945 when kirloskar brothers ltd setup kirloskar oil engines, india's largest diesel engine company, at khadki. the group has several group companies in pune including kirloskar pneumatics and the groups flagship company kirloskar brothers limited, one of india's largest manufacturers and exporters of pumps and the largest infrastructure pumping project contractor in asia. kalyani group based in pune owns a subsidiary bharat forge which operates world’s largest single location forging facility consisting of fully automated forging press lines and state-of-the-art machining facility in pune. bajaj auto is ranked as the world's fourth largest two- and three-wheeler manufacturer is based in pune.
the city is known for its automotive industry. a large number of automobile companies such as  bajaj auto, tata motors, mahindra & mahindra, skoda cars, mercedes benz, force motors, kinetic motors, general motors, land rover, jaguar, renault, volkswagen, and fiat have there manufacturing plants in pune primarily in chakan. the independent referred chakan as india's "motor city". serum institute of india, the world's fifth largest vaccine producer by volume, is based in pune.
the rajiv gandhi infotech park in hinjawadi is a ₹ 60,000 crore (us$8.9 billion) project by the maharashtra industrial development corporation (midc). the it park encompasses an area of about 2,800 acres (11 km) and is home to over 800 it companies of all sizes. besides hinjawadi, it companies are also located at magarpatta, kharadi and several other parts of the city. as of 2022, the it sector in pune employs around 400,000 - 500,000 people. pune has also emerged as a new hub for tech startups in india. nasscom, in association with midc, has started a co-working space for city based startups under its 10,000 startups initiative at kharadi midc. pune food cluster development project is an initiative funded by the world bank. it is being implemented with the help of small industries development bank of india, cluster craft to facilitate the development of the fruit and vegetable processing industries in and around pune.
pune is an emerging center for  vfx services, with indian and international studios such as anibrain, reliance animation, philm cgi, digikore studios, hmx media, stereo d, framestore and method studios having established their facilities here.
major technology companies ubisoft pune, zensar technologies, patni computer systems, persistent systems, indiacom, harbinger knowledge products, seniority, monjin, mylab discovery solutions, quick heal and kpit technologies are headquartered in pune. indian tech giant infosys was founded in pune who have a mega campus in city. zensar technologies is located in a mega campus called zensar park.
the meetings, incentives, conferencing, exhibitions trade is expected to be boosted since the pune international exhibition and convention centre (piecc) opened in 2017. the 97-hectare piecc boasts a seating capacity of 20,000 with a floor area of 13,000 m (139,931 sq ft). it has seven exhibition centres, a convention centre, a golf course, a five-star hotel, a business complex, shopping malls, and residences. the us$115 million project was developed by the pimpri-chinchwad new town development authority.
world trade center (wtc) pune is a 1.6 million sq. ft. complex built to foster international trade. wtc pune is part of the world trade centers association.
the first seed company in india, pestonjee p. pocha & sons was started at pune in 1884.
