pune
Government and public services[edit]
government and public services[edit]

main articles: pune municipal corporation, pimpri-chinchwad municipal corporation, pune police, and pmrda
civic administration[edit]
pune municipal corporation building
pune municipal corporation and pimpri-chinchwad municipal corporation are the civic bodies responsible for local government. it comprises two branches, the executive branch headed by the municipal commissioner, an ias officer appointed by the government of maharashtra, and an elected deliberative branch, the general body, headed by the mayor of pune. municipal elections are held every five years to elect councillors, commonly known as "corporators", who form the general body. the current general body of the pmc elected in february 2017 has 162 corporators representing 41 multi-member wards (39 with 4 corporators each and 2 with 3 each). the general body, in turn, elects the mayor and the deputy mayor. the mayor has a ceremonial role as the first citizen and ambassador of the city while the actual executive power lies with the municipal commissioner. for policy deliberations, corporators form several committees. perhaps the most important of these is the 16-member standing committee, half of whose members retire every year. the standing committee and the 15 ward committees are in charge of financial approvals. pmc was ranked 8th out of 21 indian cities for best governance and administrative practices in 2014. it scored 3.5 out of 10 compared to the national average of 3.3.
the pune city police department is the law enforcement agency for the city of pune. it is a division of the maharashtra police and is headed by the police commissioner, an officer of the indian police service. the pune police department reports to the state ministry of home affairs. a separate police commissionerate was announced for pcmc, pune in april 2018 to be carved out of the historic pune police department. the new commissionerate took charge on 15 august 2018.
pune metropolitan region development authority (pmrda) was formed on 31 march 2015 and is responsible for the integrated development of the pmr. currently its jurisdiction extends over 7,256.46 km (2,802 sq mi) and includes two municipal corporations, three cantonment boards, seven municipal councils, 13 census towns and 842 villages.
khadakwasla reservoir, the main source of water for the city
utility services[edit]
the pmc supplies the city with potable water that is sourced from the khadakwasla reservoir. there are five other reservoirs in the area that supply water to the city and the greater metropolitan area. the city lacks the capacity to treat all the sewage it generates, which leads to the mutha river containing only sewage outside the monsoon months. in 2009 only 65% of sewage generated was treated before being discharged into the rivers. according to anwesha borthakur  and pardeep singh, unplanned and haphazard development has turned the mula-mutha river into a dead river. the pune municipal corporation has undertaken plans to restore life into the rivers. pmc is also responsible for collecting solid waste. around 1,600 tons of solid waste is generated in pune each day. the waste consists of 53% organic, compostable material; and 47% inorganic material, of which around half is recyclable. the unrecovered solid waste is transported to the dumping grounds in urali devachi.
the state owned maharashtra state electricity distribution company limited supplies electricity to the city. bharat sanchar nigam limited (bsnl), owned by the central government, as well as private enterprises such as reliance jio, bharti airtel and vodafone idea are the leading telephone and cell phone service providers in the city.
