puri
Festivals of Puri[edit]
festivals of puri[edit]

main article: list of festivals observed at jagannatha temple, puri
the grand road near the jagannath temple
puri witnesses 24 festivals every year, of which 13 are major. the most important of these is the ratha yatra, or the car festival, held in the june–july, which is attended by more than 1 million people.
ratha yatra at puri[edit]

main article: ratha-yatra (puri)
the ratha yatra in puri in modern times showing the three chariots of the deities with the temple in the background
the jagannath temple triad are normally worshipped in the sanctum of the temple at puri, but once during the month of asadha (rainy season of orissa, usually in june or july), they are brought out on the bada danda (main street of puri) and taken over a distance of (3 kilometres (1.9 mi)) to the gundicha temple in huge chariots (ratha), allowing the public to have darśana (holy view). this festival is known as the ratha yatra, meaning the journey (yatra) of the chariots. the yatra starts every year according to the hindu calendar on the asadha sukla dwitiya day, the second day of bright fortnight of asadha (june–july).
historically, the ruling ganga dynasty instituted the ratha yatra on the completion of the jagannath temple around 1150 ad. this festival was one of those hindu festivals that was reported to the western world very early. friar odoric, in his account of 1321, reported how the people put the "idols" on chariots, and the king, the queen and all the people drew them from the "church" with song and music.
the rathas are huge wooden structures provided with large wheels, which are built anew every year and are pulled by the devotees. the chariot for jagannatha is about 45 feet (14 m) high and 35 square feet (3.3 m) and takes about 2 months for its construction. the chariot is mounted with 16 wheels, each of 7 feet (2.1 m) diameter. the carving in the front face of the chariot has four wooden horses drawn by maruti. on its other three faces, the wooden carvings are of rama, surya and vishnu. the chariot is known as nandi ghosha. the roof of the chariot is covered with yellow and red coloured cloth. the next chariot is of balabhadra which is 44 feet (13 m) in height fitted with 14 wheels. the chariot is carved with satyaki as the charioteer, roof covered in red and green coloured cloth, and the chariot is known as taladhwaja. the carvings on this chariot include images of narasimha and rudra as jagannatha's companions. the next chariot in the order is of subhadra, which is 43 feet (13 m) in height supported on 12 wheels, roof covered in black and red colour cloth, and the chariot is known as darpa dalaan and the charioteer carved is arjuna. other images carved on the chariot are of vana durga, tara devi and chandi devi. the artists and painters of puri decorate the cars and paint flower petals and other designs on the wheels, the wood-carved charioteer and horses, and the inverted lotuses on the wall behind the throne. the chariots of jagannatha pulled during ratha yatra is the etymological origin of the english word juggernaut. the ratha yatra is also termed as the shri gundicha yatra and ghosha yatra
pahandi bije during ratha yatra at puri
chhera panhara[edit]
the chhera panhara (sweeping with water) is a significant ritual associated with the ratha yatra. during this ritual, the gajapati king wears the outfit of a sweeper and sweeps all around the deities and chariots. the king cleans the road in front of the chariots with a gold-handled broom and sprinkles sandalwood water and powder. as per the custom, although the gajapati king has been considered the most exalted person in the kalingan kingdom, he still renders the menial service to jagannatha. this ritual signifies that under the lordship of jagannatha, there is no distinction between the powerful sovereign and the humblest devotee.
chandan yatra[edit]
the narendra tirtha tank where ceremonies of chandan yatra are performed

main article: chandan yatra
the chandan yatra festival held every year on akshaya tritiya day marks the commencement of the construction of the chariots of the ratha yatra. it also marks the celebration of the hindu new year.
snana yatra[edit]

main article: snana yatra
every year, on the purnima day in the hindu calendar month of jyestha (june), the triad images of the jagannath temple are ceremonially bathed and decorated on the occasion of snana yatra. water for the bath is taken in 108 pots from the suna kuan (meaning: "golden well") located near the northern gate of the temple. water is drawn from this well only once in a year for the sole purpose of the religious bath of the deities. after the bath the triad images are dressed in the fashion of the elephant god, ganesha. later, during the night, the original triad images are taken out in a procession back to the main temple but kept at a place known as anasara pindi. after this the jhulana yatra is performed when proxy images of the deities are taken out in a grand procession for 21 days, cruised over boats in the narendra tirtha tank.
anavasara or anasara[edit]
images during the snana yatra.
anasara, a derivative of the sanskrit word "anabasara", literally means vacation. every year after the holy snana yatra, the triad images, without the sudarshana chakra, are taken to a secret altar named anavasara ghar (also known as anasara pindi, 'pindi' is oriya term meaning "platform" ) where they remain for the next fortnight of (krishna paksha); devotees are not allowed to view these images. instead, devotees go to the nearby brahmagiri to see the lord in the four-handed form of alarnath, a depiction of vishnu. devotees then get the first glimpse of the lord only on the day before ratha yatra, which is called navayouvana. it is a local belief that the gods suffer from fever after taking an elaborate ritual bath, and they are treated by the special servants, the daitapatis, for 15 days. daitapatis perform special nitis (rites) known as netrotchhaba (a rite of painting the eyes of the triad). during this period cooked food is not offered to the deities.
naba kalebara[edit]

main articles: nabakalevara and nabakalebara 2015
naba kalebara is one of the most grand events associated with the ljagannatha that takes place when one lunar month of ashadha is followed by another of ashadha called adhika masa (extra month). this can take place at an interval of 8, 12 or even 18 years. literally meaning the "new body" (nava = new, kalevar = body) in odia, the festival is witnessed by millions of people and the budget for this event generally exceeds $500,000. the event involves installation of new images in the temple and burial of the old ones in the temple premises at koili vaikuntha. during the nabakalebara ceremony held during july 2015 the idols that were installed in the temple in 1996 were replaced by specially carved new images made of neem wood. more than 3 million people are reported to have attended this festival.
suna besha[edit]

main article: suna besha
suna besha or golden attire of lord jagannatha
suna besha, ('suna besh'in english translates to "gold dressing") also known as raja or rajadhiraja bhesha  or raja bhesha, is an event when the triad images of the jagannath temple are adorned with gold jewelry. this event is observed five times in a year. it is commonly observed on magha purnima (january), bahuda ekadashi also known as asadha ekadashi (july), dashahara (bijayadashami) (october), karthik purnima (november), and pousa purnima (december). one such suna bhesha event is observed on bahuda ekadashi during the ratha yatra on the chariots placed at the simhadwar. the other four beshas are observed inside the temple on the ratna singhasana (gem studded altar). on this occasion gold plates are decorated over the hands and feet of jagannatha and balabhadra; jagannatha is also adorned with a chakra (disc) made of gold on the right hand while a silver conch adorns the left hand. balabhadra is decorated with a plough made of gold on the left hand while a golden mace adorns his right hand.
niladri bije[edit]
niladri bije, celebrated in the hindu calendar month asadha (june–july) on trayodashi (13th day), marks the end of the ratha yatra. the large wooden images of the triad of gods are taken out from the chariots and then carried to the sanctum sanctorum, swaying rhythmically; a ritual which is known as pahandi.
sahi yatra[edit]
a scene from a play being enacted during the sahi yatra
the sahi yatra, considered the world's biggest open-air theatre, is an annual event lasting 11 days; a traditional cultural theatre festival or folk drama which begins on ram navami and ends on rama avishke (sanskrit meaning : anointing). the festival includes plays depicting various scenes from the ramayana. the residents of various localities, or  sahis, are entrusted the task of performing the drama at the street corners.
samudra arati[edit]
samudra arati of worship of the sea by disciples of the matha at puri
the samudra arati is a daily tradition started by the present shankaracharya 9 years ago. the daily practise includes prayer and fire offering to the sea at swargadwar in puri by disciples of the govardhan matha. on paush purnima of every year the shankaracharya himself comes out to offer prayers to the sea.
