puri
Landmarks[edit]
landmarks[edit]
jagannath temple at puri[edit]

main article: jagannath temple (puri)
left: jagannath temple at puri right: view of the temple at night
the jagannath temple at puri is one of the major hindu temples built in the kalinga style of architecture. the temple tower, with a spire, rises to a height of 58 metres (190 ft), and a flag is unfurled above it, fixed over a wheel (chakra).

left:ritual chakra and flags at the top shikhara of puri temple of jagannatha also related to sudarsana chakra. the red flag (12 hand or 14 feet (4.3 m) denotes that  jagannath is within the temple.right: statue of aruna the charioteer of the sun god on top of the aruna stambha in front of the singhadwara
the temple is built on an elevated platform (of about 420,000 square feet (39,000 m) area), 20 feet (6.1 m) above the adjacent area. the temple rises to a height of 214 feet (65 m) above the road level. the temple complex covers an area of 10.7 acres (4.3 ha). there are four entry gates in four cardinal directions of the temple, each gate located at the central part of the walls. these gates are:  the eastern gate called the singhadwara (lions gate), the southern gate known as ashwa dwara (horse gate), the western gate called the vyaghra dwara (tigers gate) or the khanja gate, and the northern gate called the hathi dwara or (elephant gate). these four gates symbolize the four fundamental principles of dharma (right conduct), jnana (knowledge), vairagya (renunciation) and aishwarya (prosperity). the gates are crowned with pyramid shaped structures. there is a stone pillar in front of the singhadwara, called the aruna stambha {solar pillar}, 11 metres (36 ft) in height with 16 faces, made of chlorite stone; at the top of the stamba an elegant statue of aruṇa (sun) in a prayer mode is mounted. this pillar was shifted from the konarak sun temple. the four gates are decorated with guardian statues in the form of lion, horse mounted men, tigers, and elephants in the name and order of the gates. a pillar made of fossilized wood is used for placing lamps as offering. the lion gate (singhadwara) is the main gate to the temple, which is guarded by two guardian deities jaya and vijaya. the main gate is ascended through 22 steps known as baisi pahaca,  which are revered, as it is believed to possess "spiritual animation". children are made to roll down these steps, from top to bottom, to bring them spiritual happiness. after entering the temple, on the left side, there is a large kitchen where food is prepared in hygienic conditions in huge quantities; the kitchen is called as "the biggest hotel of the world".
the main entrance of the jagannath temple
according to a legend king indradyumma was directed by jagannatha in a dream to build a temple for him which he did as directed. however, according to historical records the temple was started some time during the 12th century by king chodaganga of the eastern ganga dynasty. it was completed by his descendant, anangabhima deva, in the 12th century. the wooden images of jagannatha, balabhadra and subhadra were then deified here. the temple was under the control of the hindu rulers up to 1558. then, when orissa was occupied by the afghan nawab of bengal, it was brought under the control of the afghan general kalapahad. following the defeat of the afghan king by raja mansingh, the general of mughal emperor akbar, the temple became part of the mughal empire till 1751. subsequently, it was under the control of the marathas till 1803. during the british raj, the puri raja was entrusted with its management until 1947.
the triad of images in the temple are of jagannatha, personifying krishna, balabhadra, his older brother, and subhadra, his younger sister. the images are made of neem wood in an unfinished form. the stumps of wood which form the images of the brothers have human arms, while that of subhadra does not have any arms. the heads are large, painted and non-carved. the faces are marked with distinctive large circular eyes.
the pancha tirtha of puri[edit]

main article: pancha tirtha of puri
markandeshwar tank
hindus consider it essential to bathe in the pancha tirtha or the five sacred bathing spots of puri, to complete a pilgrimage to puri. the five sacred water bodies are the indradyumana tank, the rohini kunda, the markandeya tank, the swetaganga tank, and the bay of bengal also called the mahodadhi, in sanskrit 'mahodadhi' means a "great ocean"; all are considered sacred bathing spots in the swargadwara area. these tanks have perennial sources of supply from rainfall and ground water.
sunrise at puri sea beach
gundicha temple[edit]

main article: gundicha temple
main entrance of the gundicha temple
the gundicha temple, known as the garden house of jagannatha, stands in the centre of a garden, bounded by compound walls on all sides. it lies at a distance of about 3 kilometres (1.9 mi) to the northeast of the jagannath temple. the two temples are located at the two ends of the bada danda (grand avenue), which is the pathway for the ratha yatra. according to a legend, gundicha was the wife of king indradyumna who originally built the jagannath temple.
the temple is built using light-grey sandstone, and, architecturally, it exemplifies typical kalinga temple architecture in the deula style. the complex comprises four components: vimana (tower structure containing the sanctum), jagamohana (assembly hall), nata-mandapa (festival hall) and bhoga-mandapa (hall of offerings). there is also a kitchen connected by a small passage. the temple is set within a garden, and is known as "god's summer garden retreat" or garden house of jagannatha. the entire complex, including the garden, is surrounded by a wall which measures 430 by 320 feet (131 m × 98 m) with height of 20 feet (6.1 m).
except for the 9-day ratha yatra, when the triad images are worshipped in the gundicha temple, otherwise it remains unoccupied for the rest of the year. tourists can visit the temple after paying an entry fee. foreigners (generally prohibited entry in the main temple) are allowed inside this temple during this period. the temple is under the jagannath temple administration, puri,  the governing body of the main temple. a small band of servitors maintain the temple.
swargadwar[edit]
sea at swargadwar of puri
swargadwar is the name given to the cremation ground or burning ghat which is located on the shores of the sea. here thousands of dead bodies of hindus brought from faraway places are cremated. it is a belief that the chaitanya mahaparabhu disappeared from this swargadwar about 500 years back.
beach[edit]
puri sea sunrise
puri sea beach viewed from the light house
the beach at puri, known as the "ballighai beach, at the mouth of nunai river", is 8 kilometres (5.0 mi) away from the town and is fringed by casurina trees. it has golden yellow sand. sunrise and sunset are pleasant scenic attractions here. waves break in at the beach which is long and wide.
district museum[edit]
the puri district museum is located on the station road where the exhibits in display are the different types of garments worn by jagannatha, local sculptures, patachitra (traditional, cloth-based scroll painting), ancient palm-leaf manuscripts, and local craft work.
raghunandana library[edit]
raghunandana library is located in the emara matha complex (opposite simhadwara or lion gate, the main entrance gate). the jagannatha aitihasika gavesana samiti (jagannatha historical centre) is also located here. the library houses ancient palm leaf manuscripts on jagannatha, his cult and the history of the city.
