purnia
Education
education
law college, purnea
purnia has always been a centre of education in the north bihar region. zila school, founded in 1800 during the period of british rule, is purnia's oldest school, and one of the city's largest. jawahar navodaya vidyalaya, garhbanaili (14 km away from main city) is a prestigious school run by the government. vidya vihar residential school, the leading boarding school of bihar has its campus at parora on purnea. india's leading school chain g d goenka public school has its third campus of bihar in purnea after patna and gaya. purnia also has a kendriya vidyalaya. other prominent schools are -
don bosco public school s.r. dav public ursuline convent english/hindi medium school millia convent english medium school purnia high school indian public school b.b.m. high school st. peter residential school mount zion mission school bright career english school bijendra public school saraswati vidya mandir saraswati shishu mandir st. john's high school greenfield public school
there are colleges for higher studies concentrating engineering, law, arts, and home science. having recognition from the state government and various other government universities such as aryabhatta knowledge university, bihar agriculture university and purnea university, these colleges include:
purnia college b.m.t. law college vidya vihar institute of technology millia group of colleges (managed by millia education trust) bhola paswan shastri agriculture college purnia mahila college millia institute of technology millia polytechnic rambagh government polytechnic of purnea purnia college of engineering simanchal institute of medical science, kasba (opd functional from jan 2018) purnia medical college and hospital, sadar hospital (construction) shershah institute of medical sciences medical college and hospital by millia educational trust
3d animation and multimedia institute:
animation school (madhubani bazar)
the indian red cross society has the largest blood bank in the state after patna, with a capacity of 1,000 units. the bihar government recently inaugurated one of the three megastock warehouses for drugs/medicines at kasba, which aims to serve the 13 districts of north bihar.
the indira gandhi stadium houses the sports authority of india sports hostel for athletes. the dsa and zila school grounds are the city's outdoor stadiums.
the region has been blessed with purnea university (9th university of bihar). the university is the only in purnea commissionerate. it includes colleges of purnea, katihar, araria and kishanganj.
