purnia
Transportation
transportation
air
helicopter at air force station purnea
purnea airport, also known as chunapur airport (airforce station), is located within the cantonment area but is restricted to army usage only. proposals for the airport to operate scheduled flights are being widely discussed at the level of the state government.
the nearest commercial airport, bagdogra airport, is about 150 km away at bagdogra in darjeeling district. jay prakash narayan international airport (patna airport) is located in patna, capital of bihar, at a distance of 310 km from purnia.
rail
purnea junction main entrance
purnia is served by two railway stations separated by 5 km, purnia junction (station code: prna) and purnia court (station code: prnc). purnia junction is closer to the residents of khuskibagh, gulabbagh, and eastern purnia, while purnia court is in the western part of the city and caters to the residents of madhubani, janta chowk, and central and western purnia. purnia junction is situated on barauni–katihar, saharsa and purnia sections of the northeast frontier railway (nfr) and east central railway zone that connects purnia to katihar junction, jogbani, saharsa junction and barauni junction. there are daily and weekly trains to kolkata, delhi junction, patna junction, ranchi junction, muzaffarpur junction, motihari, lucknow charbagh, kanpur central, gorakhpur junction, gaya junction, and other nearby cities.
road
newly constructed  nh 231  across purnea
national highways namely  nh 31,  nh 27,  nh 231,  nh 131a make purnia accessible to the people from nearby cities & states while state highways connect the other neighbouring cities and villages to the main city area. the newly constructed  nh 27 directly connects purnia to some important towns and cities of north bihar namely darbhanga & muzaffarpur. it takes nearly 5 hours to reach muzaffarpur through this expressway. this expressway which also traverses through the newly built kosi mahasetu bridge ends at muzaffarpur to continue further for patna. it has turned out to be an alternate route for patna & has helped in decongesting the ever busy and traffic-prone nh31.
nh 31 traverse the main city and terminate gulab bagh at  nh 27 in the east and patna to the west via mokama, khagaria & begusarai.
the east–west corridor connecting silchar, assam to gujarat passes through purnia in the form of  nh 27. it is a modern four-lane highway constructed by national highways authority of india (nhai). state highways 60, 62, 65, 77 & 90 also pass through purnia.
nh 31 and  nh 27 are four-lane expressways and are a strength to the intercity transportation services.
