raebareli
Geography and climate[edit]
geography and climate[edit]
raebareli lies in the southern-central part of uttar pradesh. the district is irregular in shape but fairly compact. it forms a part of the lucknow division and lies between latitude 25° 49' north and 26° 36' north and longitude 100° 41' east and 81° 34' east. on the north, it is bounded by tehsil mohanlal ganj of lucknow and haidergarh of barabanki, on the east by tehsil mussafir khana of district sultanpur and on the south-east by pargana ateha and the kunda tehsil of district pratapgarh. the southern boundary is formed by ganga which separates it from the district of fatehpur. on the west lies the bighapur and purwa tehsil of unnao.
the district forms a part of the gangetic plain which is of recent origin according to geological chronology and reveal ordinary gangetic alluvium. the district being a part of the alluvial plain conforms to the same geological sequence as the plain itself. the only mineral of importance is kankar. the district is also noted for its deposits of reh and brick earth. the district, as a whole, is fairly compact tract of gently undulating land. the elevation varies from about 120.4 m above sea level in the north west to 86.9 m above sea level in the extreme south east, on the banks of the ganga. the highest points are the crowns of the watersheds of the different drainage channel which serve to divide the district into five main physical units, the ganga khadar, the ganga upland, the southern clay tract, the central tract or the sai upland and the northern clay tract.
raebareli has a warm subtropical climate with very cold and dry winters from december to mid february and dry, hot summers from april to mid june. the rainy season is from mid-june to mid-september when it gets an average rainfall of 1200 mm mostly from the south-west monsoon winds. during extreme winters, the maximum temperature is around 12 °c and the minimum is between 3-4 °c. fog is quite common from late december to late january. summers can be quite hot with temperatures rising to the 40-45 °c range.
