raebareli
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
air[edit]
the nearest airport to raebareli is chaudhary charan singh international airport at amausi, lucknow which is approximately 80 km from raebareli. other airports close to raebareli district are kanpur airport, allahabad airport and varanasi airport.
road[edit]
raebareli is on the route of national highway 30, between lucknow and allahabad and connected to major cities. important highways through raebareli are:
raebareli-ayodhya highway (nh330a) raebareli-tanda highway (nh128) raebareli-jaunpur highway (nh31) kanpur-raebareli highway (nh31) lucknow-raebareli-allahabad highway (nh30)

expressway main article: ganga expressway
ganga expressway is an under-construction 594 km long, 6 lane wide (expandable to 8) greenfield expressway project in the state of uttar pradesh, india. it will pass through 12 districts including raebareli.
ring road main article: ring road raebareli
ring road raebareli is an elevated section of road at raebareli in uttar pradesh, india. it is an outer bypass road and crosses the sharda river. it has been constructed to divert the traffic between lucknow and prayagraj, allowing vehicles to get to their destinations without entering the city of raebareli.
railways[edit]
rae bareli junction railway station
raebareli junction lies on varanasi-rae bareli-lucknow line and raebareli-allahabad rail line of the northern railway. a rail line is being built from raebareli to faizabad via akbarganj, on the northern railways network. raebareli is well connected with some of the major cities of the country and the rest is inter-connected with other trains. some of the destinations covered by trains passing through rae bareli junction are lucknow, allahabad, varanasi, jaisalmer, shaktinagar, puri, bhopal, howrah, amritsar, jodhpur, bareilly, dehradun, lalkuan, jammu tawi, saharanpur, bangalore, mumbai, new delhi, kanpur and others.
high-speed rail corridor main article: delhi–varanasi high-speed rail corridor
delhi-varanasi high speed rail corridor is india's second bullet train project after the mumbai-ahmedabad high-speed rail corridor. the 865-kilometre (537 mi) high speed rail corridor will connect varanasi to delhi through 12 stations. delhi-varanasi high speed rail corridor will have 12 stations including  raebareli.
