raiganj
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

this section does not cite any sources. please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (november 2016) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
nbstc, raiganj
rickshaws, auto-rickshaws, e-rickshaws and city autos are the most widely available public transport in raiganj. most residents stay within a few kilometres of the town centre and have their own vehicles, mostly motorcycles and bicycles.
raiganj railway station is on the barsoi-radhikapur branch line. railway connectivity reached here more than 150 years ago but, due to indo-bangladesh partition in 1971 the links through bangladesh were lost and the railway became only a branch line.
nh 34 passes through raiganj which connects is to the capital of the state kolkata. conversion of the highway to four lanes is going on and the proposed highway will bypass raiganj by about 6 km. the roadway connectivity suffers due to the traffic jam caused at dalkhola on a regular basis. raiganj also lacks in railway connectivity because the station is on a branch line. in the 1960s, the broad gauge line was shifted to malda-barsoi-dalkhola, thus bypassing raiganj.
roadways[edit]
raiganj is connected by buses to a few major cities through nbstc and private bus services. nh 12 and sh 10a are its lifelines. sh 10a connects it to kaliaganj, balurghat, hili. buses are available all day long to balurghat, siliguri, jalpaiguri, alipurduar, coochbehar, malda, kolkata, maharaja hat and a few other important cities. overnight bus facilities are available mostly to kolkata and dhubri.
railways[edit]
rdp-sguj demu at sguj
raiganj railway station is on the barsoi-radhikapur branch line. one express train, radhikapur express, is available for reaching kolkata, and a link superfast express train, radhikapur-anandvihar express, is available for going to new delhi. a couple of katihar bound local passenger trains and a siliguri bound dmu passenger can also be availed.
mamata banerjee during her tenure as the union railways minister announced railways projects for raiganj which boosted the communication. the radhikapur howrah kulik express is also available in morning from raiganj railway station inaugurated by mp debasree chaudhuri.
raiganj-dalkhola line (43.43 km) raiganj-itahar-gazole line kaliyaganj-buniadpur line
airways[edit]
raiganj has no airport of its own. the government announced an airport in raiganj named as raiganj airport.
the nearest operating airport is bagdogra airport near siliguri, about 166 km from raiganj. indigo and spicejet are the major carriers that connect the area to delhi, kolkata, hyderabad, guwahati, mumbai, chennai, bangkok, paro, chandigarh and balurghat airport.
