raiganj
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]
raiganj bird sanctuary[edit]
situated along the national highway and by the side of the kulik river is the raiganj wildlife sanctuary with an area of 35 acres and a buffer area of 286 acres. it is the largest bird sanctuary in asia. the forest and water bodies attract migratory birds like the open bill stork, night heron, cormorant, little cormorant and egret from south asian countries and coastal regions. local birds like dove, bulbul, sparrow, kingfisher, woodpecker, owl, duck and cuckoo, can also be seen in large numbers.
the migratory birds arrive from the end of may to the first week of july, and depart from mid-december to the end of january. the nesting time is from july to august, and egg laying from august to september. the flying training to the young ones is the best time to observe the birds, around october to november. every winter nearly 150 different bird species arrive here from the north in numbers ranging from 65,000 to 75,000.
the sanctuary has an artificial network of man made canals which is connected to the river kulik. during the months of monsoon the flood water from the river enters the plains of the sanctuary. this acts as an important source of food for most of the bird species.
legal status of the forest:
reserved forest  573.71 acres   protected forest  249.50 acres   unclassed forest  660.54 acres   total  1483.75 acres = 610.71 ha = 6.01 sq. km
this bird sanctuary is set to be rejuvenated, with plans of developing a deer park and a tortoise park soon at the core of the sanctuary by the state government.
raiganj church[edit]
raiganj church
the raiganj church is dedicated to st. joseph the worker, the patron saint of raiganj diocese. the spacious building has glass and ceiling paintings, prominent pillars on both sides modelled on greek pillars, carved doors and a high altar with an hexagonal dome on top of it.
jain temples[edit]
ayodhya is the birthplace for 5 tirthankars adinath, ajitnath, abhinandannath, sumatinath and ananthnath. shri 1008 digamabar adinath jain mandir is one of the most famous temple in aodhya.  a 31 feet tall adinath idol in standing posture is present here. this place has been recently developed with the blessings of acharya ratna deshbhushanji maharaj and ganini pramukh aryika gyanmati mataji. there is a famous shvetambar temple dedicated to ajitnatha with a copper-colored idol of 30 cm as its moolnayak. there are other jain temples including kamal mandir and chaubisi temple.
other notable places[edit]
there are few other notable tourist destinations nearby, throughout the uttar dinajpur district.
sap nikla forest and tourists visit the lake and the forest for sightseeing. eco-tourism at bijolia more. here river sudhani forms an island by dividing into two branches and joining again. temple of goddess bhairabi at bindole. mosque of burhana fakirs. mosque of burhana fakirs. temple of goddess kali of baira at kaliaganj terracotta pottery and malgaon at kunore museum at karnajora. park at karnajora. soni temple maharaja hat, raiganj
