raipur
History[edit]
history[edit]
the earliest archaeological evidence from old sites and ruins of the fort indicate the existence of raipur since the 9th century. however, there is enough literary evidence that defines the history of raipur since the time of the maurya empire. raipur district was once part of southern kosal and considered to be under the maurya empire. raipur had later been the capital of the haihaya kings, controlling the traditional forts of chhattisgarh for a long time. satawahana kings ruled this part till the 2nd-3rd century ce. samudragupta had conquered this region in the fourth century, but the region came under the sway of sarabhpuri kings and then nala kings in the 5th and 6th centuries. later on, somavanshi kings had taken control over this region and ruled with sirpur as their capital city. the kalchuri kings of tumman ruled this part for a long time making ratanpur as capital. it is believed that the king ramachandra of this dynasty established the city of raipur and subsequently made it the capital of his kingdom.
another story about raipur is that king ramachandra's son brahmdeo rai had established the city. his capital was khalwatika (now khallari). the newly constructed city was named after brahmdeo rai as 'raipur'. it was during this time in 1402 ce. that the temple of hatkeshwar mahadev was constructed on the banks of the river kharun, which remains one of the oldest landmarks in raipur. after the death of king amarsingh deo, this region had become the domain of the bhonsle kings of nagpur. with the death of raghuji the iii, the territory was assumed by the british government from the bhonsle kings and chhattisgarh was declared a separate commission with its headquarters at raipur in 1854. after independence, the raipur district was included in the central provinces and berar. raipur district became a part of madhya pradesh on 1 november 1956 and subsequently became a part of chhattisgarh on 1 november 2000 with raipur becoming the capital of the new state.
