raipur
Government and politics[edit]
government and politics[edit]
civic administration[edit]
raipur city has a municipal corporation. it was initially established by the british on 17 may 1867, initially named raipur municipal committee. it was upgraded to raipur municipal corporation in the year 1973. the area of the municipal corporation is 226 km (87 sq mi). rmc is governed under the guidelines mentioned in the chhattisgarh municipalities act, 1961. as per the 2011 census of india, the urban agglomeration population in raipur, durg-bhilai was 3,186,632. the three urban cities of raipur, bhilai and durg in the west central region of chhattisgarh together create the raipur-bhilai-durg tri city metro area.
jaistambh chowk, raipur (center point of chhattisgarh)
ghadi chowk, raipur (nagar ghadi) nagarghari
the functions under the municipal corporation are the construction of health centres, educational institutes, schools, and periodic maintenance of the houses. in addition to taking the responsibility of constructing basic civic infrastructure, flyovers, and roads, it is also developing recreational centres such as museums, community halls, and parks. along with basic civic infrastructure, flyovers, and roads.
the executive committee consists of the commissioner, deputy commissioner, city health officers, executive engineers, zone commissioners, and other staff. the municipal commissioner of raipur is shri. saurabh kumar (i.a.s). the current mayor is aijaz dhebar from inc. the mayor in the council consists of the mayor who is the ex officio chairperson of the mic. among elected councillors, the mayor elects them to the council. there are 70 wards and 8 zones within the raipur municipal corporation. the zonal ward committees are headed by chairpersons who are elected by ward councillors of the respective zone.
the recent municipal elections were held on 21 december 2019. the political parties in the majority at the municipal level are bjp and inc. the estimated municipal budget the 2017-2018 period is ₹ 2,612,667. key revenue sources are tax income, fees and charges, sanitation charges, grants and donations, and capital income.
the city is a part of raipur district with s. bharathi dasan, ias/collector and dm. the collector heads the district administration department. the upper collector, deputy collector and joint deputy assist the collector. other governing agencies that are active in the city of raipur is the urban administration and development, chhattisgarh.
master plan[edit]
raipur master plan 2021 recognizes the need for planned development to take the pressure off the downtown core and meet the need for green spaces and bodies of water in that area. the plan calls for dense housing in new subdivisions on the outskirts and well-planned high-rise commercial and industrial development along with the nh-6 as well as on the north side of the city.
legislative assembly and state agencies[edit]
raipur is a lok sabha/parliamentary constituency in central chhattisgarh of chhattisgarh state, and is located in central india. raipur's lok sabha seat is unreserved. mr.sunil kumar soni, bjp is raipur city's mp. there are three mla constituencies in raipur city and one constituency for raipur rural. the respective mlas of the three constituencies are raipur city south mla is mr. brijmohan agrawal, bjp, for raipur city north it is mr. kuldeep juneja, inc and for raipur city west it is mr. vikas upadhyay, inc.
