raipur
Civic utilities[edit]
civic utilities[edit]
transport services[edit]
the superintendent of engineers executive engineers, the team of engineers, and the staff responsible for the related activities of the road department head the public works department. their purposes are planning and designing of road stormwater drains, maintenance of roads and streets, maintenance of gardens and parks, resurfacing the roads, and repairing potholes and bad patches.
in the bus transport system of raipur city there is a total number of 157 buses plying within the city.
fire service and electricity[edit]
the city's electricity is supplied by chhattisgarh state power distribution company limited. fire and emergency services were set up in 2016 to protect fire incidents in the state. as per the directions of the government, the fire station of the urban body are being taken under fire and emergency services.
water, drainage and sewerage[edit]
the existing source of unfiltered water is from the kharun river, and about 170 million litres of water per day (mld) is treated on a daily basis, and the plant has a treatment capacity of 275 mld. the per capita water supply in the city of raipur is 135 litres per day. there is a water supply connection serving a total of 50,000 households. along with water from the kharun river (27 mld), another source of water is groundwater, and the capacity utilized is 22 mld. there is a total of 1,133 handpumps in the city.
there is a lack in the sewerage systems of raipur city. the data for households with a sewerage network is unavailable, but the number of households with septic tanks are 1,44,882 and the households without any outlets for toilets is 5,649. the city has no separate drainage system nor any sewer lines. there is a separate stormwater drainage system, laid as per requirement.
solid waste management[edit]
the waste management in the city is entrusted with the city health officer, the in-charge health officer, zonal health officer, and the team of sanitary supervisors and ward supervisors. a total of 3,56,490 households have been successful with source segregation and are covered by door-to-door collection. raipur's major waste disposal site is the sarona site, which is 12 km away from the city centre.
