raipur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road ways[edit]
raipur junction railway station
sri balaji swami trust sri dudhadhari math inter state bus terminal, raipur
swami vivekananda airport, raipur
some major and famous roads in raipur are national highway (nh - 53), national highway (nh - 30), great eastern road, pandri road, baloda bazar road, nardha raipur road, vip road, and atal path expressway.
the raipur–naya raipur expressway narrowguage expressway, also known as "atal path expressway raipur," is a 12.7-kilometre (7.9 mi) access controlled expressway connecting raipur to naya raipur. it has been made to ease the traffic on the ge road and provide faster access to dhamtari road from raipur railway station. it serves 4 flyovers and 1 elevated corridor crossing over ge road and nh53 in between two ends of expressway.
bus transport[edit]
a newly constructed bus stand sri balaji swami trust sri dudhadhari math inter state bus terminal or isbt raipur is located at ravanbhantha, and is the main bus stand of the city. it has replaced the old minimata bus stand or pandri stand which was creating traffic problems. the services of isbt started on 15 november 2021. raipur and naya raipur brts bus services run between old raipur and naya raipur.
railways[edit]
raipur junction railway station is the primary railway station of the city, which is situated on the howrah-nagpur-mumbai line of the indian railways (via bhusawal, nagpur, gondia, bilaspur, rourkela, kharagpur), and is connected with most major cities. it is categorized in the a-1 category of railway stations by the indian railways. some small railway stations are also present here for local trains like sarona, saraswati nagar, and wrs colony railway stations. they also lie on the same howrah-nagpur-mumbai line.
airport[edit]
swami vivekananda airport or mana airport is the primary airport serving the state of chhattisgarh. the airport is located 15 km (9.3 mi) south of raipur, near naya raipur.
raipur is well-connected, having daily direct flights to mumbai, delhi, hyderabad, visakhapatnam, kolkata, bangalore, pune, chennai, goa, lucknow, indore, ahmedabad, bhopal, bhubaneswar, srinagar, nagpur, thiruvananthapuram,  prayagraj, jharsuguda and jagdalpur, operated by air india, indigo and vistara.
