rajahmundry
History[edit]
history[edit]
see also: rajamundry sarkar
this section possibly contains original research. please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations. statements consisting only of original research should be removed. (july 2017) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
portrait of nannayya
painting representing historical significance of rajahmundry city at a wall in rajahmundry railway station
rajahmundry was established by ammaraja vishnuvardhana the first (919–934 ad). the city as a prominent settlement can be traced back to the rule of the eastern chalukya king rajaraja narendra, who reigned around 1022 ad. remains of 11th-century palaces and forts still exist.
rulers:
eastern chalukyas cholas kakatiyas eastern ganga dynasty reddies gajapati empire vijayanagar rulers bahmani sultanate golconda sultanate nizam rule european rulers and zamindars
rajahmundry was under dutch rule for some time. in 1602, the dutch constructed a fort here. in 1857, the british conquered the dutch. they converted it into a jail in 1864 and elevated it into a central jail in 1870. the jail is spread over 196 acres (79 ha) out of which the buildings occupy 37.24 acres (15.07 ha).
in the madras presidency, the district of rajahmundry was created in 1823. it was reorganised in 1859 and was bifurcated into godavari and krishna districts. during british rule, rajahmundry was the headquarters of godavari district, which was further bifurcated into east godavari and west godavari districts in 1925. when the godavari district was split, kakinada became the headquarters of east godavari and eluru became headquarters of west godavari.
rajahmundry was the hotbed of several movements during india's freedom struggle and acted as a base for many key leaders. when the indian national congress had its first meeting in bombay (mumbai), two leaders from rajahmundry, nyapathi subba rao and kandukuri veeresalingam, participated in it. subba rao, founder of hindu samaj in rajahmundry, was also one of the six founders of india's noted english daily, the hindu.
the renaissance of andhra pradesh started in rajahmundry. kandukuri veeresalingam is known as the father of reforms in andhra pradesh. he started a monthly magazine vivekavardhini, and a school for girls at dowleswaram in 1874. the first widow remarriage took place on 11 december 1881. a society with 16 members was started on 22 june 1884, which used to look after widow remarriages in rajahmundry. the town hall was established in 1890 by veeresalingam. bipin chandra pal visited rajahmundry in april 1905 during the vandemataram movement. during his visits, he used to address the public in "pal chowk" (the present-day kotipalli bus stand). annie besant visited rajahmundry twice. first, she came during the foundations of a branch of the divya gyan samaj at alcot gardens were being laid. she came again during the opening ceremony. ramakrishna mission was established in the city during 1950–51 near kambal tank. the place is now the ayakar bhavan.
rajahmundry is acclaimed as the birthplace of the telugu language—its grammar and script evolved from the pen of the city-born poet nannayya. also known as 'ādi kavi' (the first poet) of telugu, nannayya, along with tikkana and yerrana, translated the sanskrit version of mahabharata into telugu. kandukuri veeresalingam – a social reformer and the author of rajashekhara charithra, the first telugu novel – was also from rajahmundry.
