rajahmundry
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in rajahmundry
godavari rail bridges view from pushkharghat
rajahmundry railway station entrance
rajahmundry airport
the bridges across godavari river are an important transport infrastructure for connectivity such as, the godavari bridge, which is the third longest railroad bridge in india; and the godavari arch bridge, commissioned on 14 march 1997 for howrah–chennai main line. while, the old godavari bridge (the havelock bridge) was the earliest of all, built in 1897 and was decommissioned in 1997. the city also has dowleswaram cotton barrage bridge and fourth bridge on either side of the main city that connects the highways of east godavari and west godavari districts.
roads[edit]
rajahmundry is very well connected to the state and the rest of india with a network of state and national highways. nh 16 passes through the city. nh 365bb, nh 516d connects the city with khammam, suryapet and hyderabad. nh 216a which is a spur road to nh-16 connects the city with ravulapalem, tanuku, tadepalligudem and eluru. nh 516e connects the city with vizianagaram via rampachodavaram, narsipatnam and araku.
adb road and sh 40 (canal road) connects the city with kakinada and sh 41 is connected with odisha, chhattisgarh, telangana borders with andhra pradesh and bhadrachalam. sh 104 connects the city with amalapuram. sh 172 is connected to purushottampatnam and polavaram project. sh 72 connects the city to nidadavolu, palakollu and narasapuram, bhimavaram.
nhai is constructing flyovers on nh 16 and nh 216a at diwancheruvu, lalacheruvu, morampudi, vemagiri and kadiyapulanka junctions in the city to ease traffic. trumpet bridge is being constructed at adb road on nh 16 in rajanagaram. an rob was proposed from morampudi to kotipalli bus stand. godavari urban development authority (guda), greater rajamahendravaram municipal corporation (grmc) are constructing an outer ring road (orr) for the city to ease traffic in the city.
railways[edit]
rajahmundry railway station is classified as an a category station. it is located on the howrah-chennai main line of south central railway zone. the new platforms 4 and 5 will be operational in the year 2023. godavari, kadiyam, and kovvur are other railway stations serving the city region. a second railway line is proposed on the godavari arch bridge. a new railway line to raipur from the city connecting rampachodavaram and other east agency areas is in the proposal. the frequency of trains will be increased after the completion of kovvur-bhadrachalam railway line and the distance to secunderabad will be decreased.
waterways[edit]
national waterway 4 was declared on 24 november 2008, which connects the indian states of telangana, andhra pradesh, tamil nadu, and the union territory of puducherry. it passes through kakinada, rajahmundry, tadepalligudem, eluru, commanur, buckingham canal and also part of krishna and godavari rivers. kakinada port is the nearest port to the city. a new commercial port is under construction at kakinada city by gmr on ppp mode. narasapuram port is proposed according to ap state reorganisation act. it is being developed by inland waterways authority of india.inland water port is proposed at bobbillanka. aptdc and other private agencies' boats and launches are available daily from pushakar ghat to papikondalu and bhadrachalam.
airways[edit]
rajahmundry airport is situated at madhurapudi in the greater rajamahendravaram area. this airport serves the people of godavari districts and currently handles non-stop flights to and fro the cities namely bangalore, chennai, hyderabad, tirupati, and visakhapatnam. there is a high demand for direct flight services to mumbai and delhi. the airport's runway was expanded from 1,749 m to 3,165 m and it is the second longest runway in the state of andhra pradesh. a new integrated domestic terminal will come up at rajahmundry airport as part of its expansion and upgradation plans. the new terminal building, which will be built at a cost of rs 135 crore, will have all modern facilities including aero bridges, and will be able to handle 1,400 passengers (700 arrivals and 700 departures) at a time. the airport has also obtained a dgca license for handling wide-bodied aircraft such as airbus a321 and boeing 737. the airport also has a dedicated cargo terminal. the government of ap is keen on exporting flowers through this airport from nurseries in kadiyam mandal in the city. the government proposed an iaf base in this airport.
