rajahmundry
Education[edit]
education[edit]
the primary and secondary school education is imparted by government, aided and private schools, under the school education department of the state. as per the school information report for the academic year 2016–17, the city has 55,501 students enrolled in 244 schools. the medium of instruction followed by schools are telugu and english. the railway high school in the city has a history of more than hundred years, established in the year 1909.
the city has one of the thirteen regional offices of the board of intermediate education, which administers intermediate education (10+2) education. the government junior college is the only government run junior college, established in 1974 and there are four private-aided, twenty private-unaided colleges in the city.
the government arts college was founded more than 150 years ago by the reformer, kandukuri veeresalingam panthulu. the bed training institute is one of the oldest in india. adikavi nannaya university was established in march 2006, named after an 11th-century poet, nannayya. other major universities in the city include potti sreeramulu telugu university, acharya n. g. ranga agricultural university, dr. b.r. ambedkar open university study center. andhra pradesh state forest academy is located in the city for forest skills training.
national institute of technology, andhra pradesh, tadepalligudem is located 34 km (21 mi) from the city.
central government institutions in the city are as follows:
"central tobacco research institute (ctri)". "national centre for disease control (ncdc)". "national academy of constructions (nac)".
"central floriculture institute and research centre" is in construction at vemagiri. "science city" is in construction at bommuru.
after the reorganization of andhra pradesh state the following institutes are sanctioned for the city:
"indian institute of petroleum and energy (iipe)". "national civil aviation academy". "national institute of drama (nid)". "ap state forest academy".
