rajkot
Education[edit]
education[edit]
christ college building       pdm college of commerce, one of the oldest colleges in the city       rk university
rajkot is famous for providing education to mahatma gandhi (gandhiji), at the alfred high school. a number of schools in the city are run by rajkot municipal corporation. they include 20 schools and learning centres, which consist of 3 elementary schools, 7 middle schools, 4 junior high schools, 4 senior high schools, 1 education centre, and 1 special school. there are also some self-financed public schools. there are two schools offering international curriculum: the northstar school, which offers cambridge assessment international education and the galaxy school (tgs) which offers the international baccalaureate program. rajkot is home to rajkumar college, rajkot, also known as rkc, which is one of the oldest schools of india. rkc is the oldest of the chiefs' schools of india similar to mayo college at ajmer and daly college at indore where royals used to study. rkc was specially established for the princes of kathiawar. saint paul is also a renowned school affiliated to icse curriculum.
rajkot also has the union government hrd ministry run jawahar navodaya vidyalaya. it was started at the juni khadki school premise of sir lakhajiraj high school and later moved to its own building on the jamnagar road. it is a cbse board affiliated, residential school for girls and boys, providing education to those selected at the class vi level all india entrance test.
the city is home to saurashtra university, several colleges, and other institutions of higher education, both public and private. rajkot has three private universities, rk university (rku), atmiya university and marwadi university. the city has 12 engineering colleges. it has a performing arts college (vocal, classical dance, tabla vadan etc.) opposite hemu gadhvi natya gruh. the saurashtra university is the city's public university. it is spread across approximately 410 acres (1.7 km) of green land with 28 post-graduation departments.
aiims rajkot, an aiims institute has started its medical college with its inaugural batch of mbbs students in december 2020.
