rajkot
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
rajkot is connected to major indian cities by air, railway and road.
roads and highways[edit]
road network near rajkot gujarat india 2015
the gujarat state road transport corporation (gsrtc) runs regular buses to and from rajkot to other cities of gujarat. more than 81000 people travel daily with gsrtc. rajkot is very well connected with gujarat state highways and rajkot is allocated the vehicle registration code gj-3 by rto. there are a number of private bus operators connecting city with other cities of gujarat state and other states of india.
rail and internal transport[edit]
rajkot junction railway station
rajkot has two railway stations. rajkot junction railway station (station code: rjt) is the more widely used railway station for passenger trains, and has services to all the major cities of india. its elevation is 128 m above sea level. the other, smaller, railway station is bhaktinagar railway station (station code: bkng), served only by trains from somnath, veraval, junagadh and porbandar.
rajkot municipal corporation has restored city bus services with public private partnership in 2007. rmc and a private company is providing around 80 cng buses under 15 to 20 routes in city and suburbs.
recently rajkot brts was launched on 1 october 2012. a new bus rapid transit system (brts) with launching of the 10-km long blue corridor and two ac buses which will be free for the first three months. the corridor is located in the west part of the city through the 150 ft ring road connecting madhapar chokdi on the jamangar road to gondal chokdi on the gondal road. the corridor will host 11 buses in further stage.
rajkot brts route
rajkot brts bus and the corridor
the fully completed project in future will have two more corridors – green and red from arvind maniyar nagar to saurashtra university and greenland chowk to saurashtra university respectively involving 157 buses in three colours. rajkot thus becomes the second city in gujarat to have brts after ahmedabad. the city of surat too is planning an ambitious brts project, construction of which is going on presently.
to make more ease in the public transport, a city bus service 'rajkot mass transport service (rmts)' has also been added on 1 april 2015. currently, it operates on 44 routes with 90 buses.
rajkot has a large number of auto rickshaws, which operate around the clock within the city. most of these are converted to cng from petrol or diesel.
aviation[edit]
an aircraft and refuelling truck on the apron at rajkot airport
rajkot airport is located at a short distance from the city and can be accessed by cab and auto rickshaw services. there are two daily flights to mumbai, served by air india. spicejet started its services from mumbai to rajkot on 27 october 2019. air india started the rajkot new delhi flight from 15 february 2015. one more daily flight from and to new delhi has been started by air india from 1 august 2019. now the government had also made the decisions to built international airport in rajkot namely rajkot greenfield airport, at hirasar, gujarat which is currently under the construction. more flights are being added by spicejet and indigo airlines in 2021 to new destinations like bangalore, hyderabad and goa.
