rajkot
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
crystal mall kalawad road
the city contributes to the economy of the state with heavy and small scale industries under the patronage of gujarat industrial development corporation (gidc) and gujarat state financial corporation (gsfc). the economy of rajkot was supported with a 280 million world bank aid for development of infrastructure of the city. the plans are already in place to beautify and modernise the ancient city, including a rock garden, ala chandigarh. another 250 million project to rebuild the kaiser-e-hind, the only major bridge linking to the city, is already nearing completion.
real estate[edit]
real estate has been a key contributor to rajkot's development in terms of economic and infrastructure development. since early 2014, several high-rises have been built in rajkot.
high street       kings plaza       atlantis flats
industry[edit]
products made in rajkot include jewellery, silk embroidery and watch parts. industrial products include bearings, diesel engines, kitchen knives and other cutting appliances, watch parts (cases and bracelets), automotive parts, forging industry, casting industry, machine tools, share market and software development. the city is also home to several cnc machine and auto parts manufacturers.
there are about 500 foundry units in rajkot. the cluster came up mainly to cater to the casting requirements of the local diesel engine industry. the geographical spread of the cluster includes aji vasahat, gondal road, bhavanagar road areas, shapar, veraval and metoda. the majority of foundry units in rajkot produce grey iron castings for the domestic market. about 2% of the foundry units export castings such as electric motor castings and automobile castings.
rajkot also houses western region pipelines headquarter of indian oil corporation limited (iocl) near gauridad village. also natural gas industries like gspl and gspc are also present. a petroleum depot of iocl is also present.
in the near future, the government of gujarat will allocate large land areas for the development of special economic zone which will be split into three areas and will include industries such as software and automobiles. as per recent market reviews, rajkot is becoming asia's biggest automobile zone.
rajkot was formerly the leading centre in india in the field of diesel engine and submersible pumps. submersible pumps are still manufactured in the city and marketed throughout india, with some of the larger manufacturers also exporting them.
