ramgarh-cantonment
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]
research centre[edit]
pilgrimage sites[edit]
rani sati dadi temple: located near to the bijulia lake. this temple is decorated and has antique glass work with shiv and bajrang bali temples too. various events and programs are organised round the year, and thousands of pilgrims attend them and take blessings. the temple is a replica of the rani sati dadi temple;jhunjhunu. it is maintained with mangla path, bhajans being organized round the year. the temple also has facilities like hall and rooms for organizing some marriage/rituals.
rajrappa temple: located at rajrappa at a distance of 28 km from ramgarh cantonment, the site has views of the merging of river bhairavi and damodar, near mata chhinmastika temple visited by lakhs of visitors and pilgrims every year.
mata vaishno devi temple: situated in the heart of ramgarh cantt, the temple, established in 1991 by punjabi hindu biradari, ramgarh, is visited by various pilgrims from all over india. the gumbad of the temple is plated with gold.
tooti jharna temple situated about 7 km from ramgarh cantonment on nh-33 (patna-ranchi highway), it is a temple devoted to lord shiva where the source of water that falls on the shiv linga is unknown. the priest of this temple belongs to the nearby village of digwar, and hence most of the digwar villagers are connected with this temple.
maa vighneshwari temple situated at madhai mela tand (subash chowk).
rudhni math situated in camp area (temple lane) and also nag baba mandir.
kila mandir situated in shivaji road, in the heart of the town. the soldiers of ramgarh battalion had a barricade here, the temple was surrounded and secured by deep canyons filled with water, which was connected to the temple underground now named as bijulia talab (lake) which also served as water source for british camp. the gadh (kila) of ramgarh regime was situated nearly 3 km. was on the bank of river damodar. famous 'garh' was signaled from here by the means of mashal (a source of light). the 'garh' is still visible from the top of kila mandir.
now kila mandir has the radha krishna mandir which is a holy pilgrimage.
gurudwara sri guru singh sabha (gurudwara) situated in shivaji road, near subhash chowk. the gurudwara is a pilgrimage worshipped by people of all religions, and it is famous for their seva bhav.
jama masjid situated in chitarpur, 16 km away from ramgarh, this mosque is an example of mughal art and architecture. it can accommodate up to 5000 people at a time to offer their holy namaz. it is the biggest mosque of its kind in jharkhand. it is believed that this mosque was built around 1670 on a piece of land donated by the then king of ramgarh. in its present form this mosque resembles the jama masjid of delhi. the mosque has several engravings on its wall as well as calligraphy.
kothar shiv temple situated 3 km. from ramgarh on nh 23 (ramgarh – bokaro road). it is said that this temple was built during the gautam buddhah period. it has been marked by the jharkhand tourism department and preserved by the archaeological survey of india.
banjari mandir (बंजारी मंदिर) situated nearly 2 km. from ramgarh on the ramgarh – patratu state highway. an ancient shakti pooja place, established by banjara samaj.
purni madhai situated at golpar in ramgarh town near bhudwa mahadev temple and rameshwar math.
historic monuments[edit]
mahatama gandhi samadhi sathal:  this place, popularly known as "gandhi ghat", is situated on the bank of river damodar in ramgarh. mahatma gandhi had visited ramgarh during the year 1940 at the time of congress session at ramgarh. after the assassination of mahatma gandhi in 1948, pitchers containing the remains of the departed soul were dispatched to different places in the country, including ramgarh. a samadhi of gandhiji was erected to house the same. a fair used to be organized here on the occasion of the birthday and anniversary of bapu, but this practice has been discontinued. the samadhi is made of black granite stones.
mahatma gandhi samadhi sathal, ramgarh.
fasiyahi barh [फँसियाही बर (बर मतलब बरगद)] situated nearly 7 km from ramgarh (ramgarh chuttupalu ghati) on nh 33. shaheed umraon singh and shekh bhikhari, well known freedom fighters of jharkhand, were hanged at this place by the british in the year 1857.
phansi ghar situated in maran garah, giddi. it is the place where the british empire used to execute people by hanging. it is situated in the bank of river damodar.
rajendra park situated at jhanda chowk in the heart of ramgarh town where all india congress adhiveshan was organized by congress party on 19 march 1941. leaders of congress including mahatma gandhi, abdul kalam azad and rajendra pasad took part in this session. the erstwhile king of ramgarh is said to have played an instrumental role in organising this session.
nature tourism[edit]
'cheerful chutupallu (प्राकृतिक सुंदरता चुटूपालु का..) situated at about 10 km from ramgarh on the ramgarh ranchi nh-33 is a hill top with scenery. the height is 2,930 ft. over sea level. there are many dhabas and motels in the way after crossing chutupallu. environmental activist from chutupalu mr.vinay mehta has taken initiative for reducing carbon footprint to promote low emission development in chutupallu ghati and going to open nature school (j-d prakriti school) in the chutupallu shortly.
a view of valley between ramgarh and chutupallu
gandhaunia, (hindi: गंधौनिया (गरम पानी कुंड)) situated at about 20 km. near mandu. it is a hot water spring.
barso paani situated at about 30 km. from ramgarh near charhi towards hazaribagh. water falls from the ceiling giving the feeling of rainfall in a cave when someone claps.
liril fall situated 6 km. from ramgarh on the nh 33 nh-33 looks like the fall from the old liril soap advertisement. it is popularly known as liril fall. picnics are common here.
birsa munda zoological garden situated between ranchi and ramgarh at about 35 to 40 km. a large zoological garden.
lugu pahar(hills) situated nearly 20 km. from ramgarh. nearest railway station is daniya, besides gomia, a famous indian explosive factory.
brigadier puri park brigadier puri park is situated on nh 33 at bijulia in the heart of ramgarh town. a statue of late brigadier puri is situated in park. on 10 june 1984, sikh soldiers stationed at ramgarh mutinied. the commandant of the sikh regimental centre in ramgarh, brig s.c. puri, and his two deputies, col jagdev singh and col h.s. cheema, were attacked. while brigadier puri died, his two deputies were injured.
