ramgarh-cantonment
this article is about the city. for the district, see ramgarh district. for the community development block, see ramgarh (community development block).

for other uses, see ramgarh.
this article may need to be rewritten to comply with wikipedia's quality standards. you can help. the talk page may contain suggestions. (september 2012)

this article is written like a manual or guidebook. please help rewrite this article from a descriptive, neutral point of view, and remove advice or instruction. (january 2019) (learn how and when to remove this template message)

place in jharkhand, india
ramgarh cantonmentcity district headquarters clockwise from top left: temples of mahavidyas, maa chhinnamasta temple, naikari damramgarh cantonmentlocation in jharkhand, indiaramgarh cantonmentramgarh cantonment (india)show map of jharkhandshow map of indiashow allcoordinates: 23°37′n 85°29′e﻿ / ﻿23.62°n 85.48°e﻿ / 23.62; 85.48coordinates: 23°37′n 85°29′e﻿ / ﻿23.62°n 85.48°e﻿ / 23.62; 85.48country indiastate jharkhanddistrictramgarhpopulation (2011) • total132,441languages • officialhinditime zoneutc+5:30 (ist)pin829122vehicle registrationjh-24websitewww.ramgarh.nic.in
ramgarh cantonment, usually referred to as ramgarh cantt or just ramgarh is a cantonment town, belonging to the ramgarh district of the indian state of jharkhand. historically, a subdivision of the larger hazaribag district, ramgarh was finally elevated to a district status on 12 september 2007 largely to ease administrative hardships.
a town with a population just short of a million, ramgarh houses the regimental centers for two of the oldest infantry regiments of india, namely the punjab regiment estd. 1761 and the sikh regiment estd. 1846. amongst the most decorated regiments of the erstwhile raj, the jawans of these two regiments have showcased their valour in several battles including the afghan wars, the battle of tofrek, the battle of abyssynia, the first and the second world wars and various other post-independence battles.
ramgarh cantonment is a category-i (population exceeding 50,000) cantonment. the cantonment board functions as a civic administration body and is obliged to take care of mandatory duties like provision of public health, water supply, sanitation, primary education, street lighting etc. thus the scope of the board function extends to the entire gamut of municipal administration. in addition to providing basic amenities, the board also operates various social, cultural and educational institutions for the residents at multiple levels.
besides the ex-officio and nominated members, the board also comprises locally elected members from multiple wards as per the cantonments act, 2006. the term of office for a board member remains five years. the board formally consists of eight elected members, three nominated members from within the military, three ex-officio members (station commander, garrison engineer and senior executive medical officer) and one representative of the district magistrate.
ramgarh is encompassed by the extensively rich mineral fields at rajrappa, laiyo, ghato, bhurkunda, topa, sarubera, sirka, urrimari, sayal, and gidi. the enthralling vale of chutupalu connects the town to the state capital ranchi, about 45 km away. the river damodar flanks the north of the town.
