ramgarh-cantonment
History[edit]
history[edit]
in mahajanpada period, probably the chotanagpur was under sub-ordination of mahapadma nanda. in maurya period, it is also said that the entire chhotanagpur was under the subordination of ashoka. there are symbolic relies of buddha period in the temple of gola. probably in 8th centre b.c. (3) jain trithankar was constructed in parasnath. in chapter iv of gazetteer iv, it is described that samudragupta (c.385-c-380 a.d.) had invader eastern deccan by passing through this area.
ramgarh raj was established in 1368 with urda at sisia as capital. the founder king of ramgarh raj was king baghdeo singh. the headquarters of capital was transferred to badam and  then to ramgarh.  in 1670 the king dalel singh shifted his capital to ramgarh and named it after his father ram singh and ramgarh raj name was used by royal family henceforth.
it is mentioned in district gazetteer, hazaribagh, chapter iv, page no.- 69 in around 1740, ramgarh was "jungle district of ramgarh". the power of obtaining a reference from ramgarh regime was given to east india company by king shah alam ii.
according to district gazetteer, page no.- 70, in 1771 captain comac was made military collector of ramgarh district, whose headquarters was in chatra. the military district of ramgarh contains nagpur, palamu, hazaribagh, chatra, giridih and kodarma. at that time the headquarters of ramgarh battalion was hazaribagh, whose commander was a european. it is mentioned in district gazetteer, hazaribagh chapter iv, page no.- 72.
the great social reformer and the founder of the brahm samaj raja ram mohan roy were in ramgarh in 1805–06. he went there with mr. william digby who was then acting magistrate and registrar of ramgarh. raja ram mohan roy was the sheristeder of the collectorate and lived both at cahtra and ramgarh in this capacity when mr. william digby was transferred else here he took ram mohan roy with him to his new place of work".
in 1811, ramgarh battalion was used for suppressing the munda, uraon and tamad revolt and kol revolt. in 1837, ramgarh was a police station of the british government. in 1938 a new g.t. road was started and banaras road was closed. it is worth mentioning the name of lubia manjhi. bainu manjhi and arjun manjhi. in sitagarh, the cropping of coffee was taking place. the name of rupu manjhi is famous in the first national revolt of 1857.
on 8 january 1856, sheik bhikari and thakur umraon singh were hanged on a bunyan tree of chhuttupalu valley. this valley is also known as lalki ghaati and that bunyan tree is called "phansiyahi bore". in 1923, shri k.b. sahay of swaraj party was elected for the provincial legislative council of hazaribagh district (including ramgarh) (gazetteer, page no. 78). during world war ii, the chinese x force was trained at ramgarh by american instructors at british expense.
indian national congress 53rd session: in 1940 the 53rd annual session of the inc was held at ramgarh under the presidency of maulana abul kalam azad. at the same time, under the leadership of netaji subhash chandra bose, a conference against samjhauta was also held at ramgarh. storm and hurricane were on the peak. in ramgarh, subhash chandra bose was seen as the president of all india forward block and m.n. roy was seen as the leader of the radical democratic party.
entry to the original place of the inc session is presently not allowed to the public and the place is under the control of the army. the exact location of bose's session remains controversial.
chinese troops at ramgarh training center june 1944.
during wwii chinese troops underwent training at ramgarh.
ramgarh cantt council was the early military cantonment structured in 1941. the history of cantonment started with the land administration for quartering of troops. housing was the core objective which attracted the civilian population also to reside in the cantonment. the bazaar area was recognized and the cantonment clearly defined in military, bungalow and civil area.
during the 1940s chinese troops were trained at ramgarh by an american contingent. a british prisoner of war camp existed at ramgarh at that time where several thousand german and italian prisoners were housed. with the arrival of the chinese troops, the prisoners were relocated and the infrastructure handed over for training. the first two american officers arrived at ramgarh on 27 june 1942. the first chinese troops arrived on 17 july 1942. initially, the center was meant for the housing, rehabilitation, clothing, medical treatment, re-equipping and training of the chinese units which withdrew from burma in may 1942, unable to stop japanese advances in the burma campaign, forfeiting the famous burma road and most of northern burma. however, other chinese units were brought in soon. the first course of instruction at ramgarh commenced on 3 august 1942.
on 10 june 1984, sikh soldiers of the sikh regimental center at ramgarh camp in the erstwhile bihar state rebelled and murdered their commander, brig. gen. r.s. puri. the mutiny was sparked by an army assault the previous week on the holiest shrine of the sikh religion, the golden temple in the punjab city of amritsar. more than 450 people were killed in the attack ordered by prime minister indira gandhi. two other senior officers and a number of soldiers were seriously wounded in heavy shooting at the camp that began before noon and continued until 4 p.m. the soldiers joined other angry sikhs in hijacking private buses and trucks at gunpoint. they set out in at least 35 seized vehicles toward new delhi before reinforcements from the 24th mountain regiment arrived to stop them. sikh soldiers remaining behind at the camp raised a white flag of surrender when the reinforcements arrived.
on 12 september 2007, ramgarh became a new district taking the total count of district in the state to 24.
