rampur-uttar-pradesh
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]
jama masjid
jama masjid in rampur up
the foundation of jama masjid in rampur was laid by nawab faizullah khan. it was built at the cost of 300,000 at that time and it was further completed by nawab kalb ali khan. the area around the jama masjid became a center of attraction and a big market was developed around it, known today as the shadab market. a big jewellery market also lines the masjid known as sarrafa. the shops were rented out to businessmen to meet the mosque's requirements. hindus and muslims both own these shops and customers belong to both communities. this shows communal harmony that exists in this area.
raza library
rampur's raza library
nawab faizullah khan, who ruled rampur from 1774 to 1794, established the library from his personal collection of ancient manuscripts and miniature specimens of islamic calligraphy in the last decades of the 18th century. it is one of the biggest libraries of asia. as all the succeeding nawabs were great patrons of scholars, poets, painters, calligraphers and musicians, the library grew by leaps and bounds. notable additions were made to the collection during the rule of nawab ahmad ali khan (1794–1840).
it contains very rare and valuable collection of manuscripts, historical documents, specimens of islamic calligraphy, miniature paintings, astronomical instruments and rare illustrated works in arabic and persian. the raza library also contains printed works in sanskrit, hindi, urdu, pashto (having the original manuscript of the first translation of the qur'an in addition to other important books/documents), tamil and turkish, and approximately 30,000 printed books (including periodicals) in various other languages.
rampur planetarium
state of the art planetarium is being established at rampur. this will be india's first planetarium based on digital laser technology. the planetarium building is almost complete and equipments are being installed. the information will be directly fed by nasa.
gandhi samadhi
gandhi samadhi is a memorial to mahatma gandhi. it signifies the struggles that mahatma gandhi took over for the independence of india from british rule.
kothi khas bagh
kothi khas bagh is a palace located at rampur, about 30 km east of moradabad in uttar pradesh. it was the erstwhile residence of the nawabs of rampur. set in a 300-acre compound, this huge 200-room european style palace is a unique blend of islamic architecture and british architecture. it also features personal apartments and offices, music rooms and personal cinema hall of nawabs. the huge halls, adorned with burma teak and belgium glass chandeliers, present a fine specimen of the architecture of a bygone era. there is an italian marble staircase towards the main bedrooms. the statue of kalb ali khan, the second nawab of rampur, is an eye-catching one. kothi khas bagh is now in a dilapidated state due to the age and neglect.
ambedkar park
ambedkar park is a memorial to bhimrao ambedkar. it is a park with a railway line along its boundary.
