rampur-uttar-pradesh
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: rampur state
as per medieval history, rampur was the part of the delhi region, and was divided between badaun and sambhal districts. being situated on upperside of rohilkhand, it was known by the name kather and was ruled by katheria rajputs. the katheria rajputs resisted external for about 400 years, fighting the sultans of delhi and later with the mughals. they went to repeated battles with nasiruddin mahmud in 1253, ghiyas ud din balban in 1256, jalal-ud-din khalji in 1290, firuz shah tughlaq in 1379 & sikandar lodi in 1494.
later, in the beginning of the mughal period, the capital of rohilkhand was changed from badaun to bareilly and hence the importance of rampur increased.
flag of princely rampur.
the rohilla war of 1774–5 began when the rohilla pathans - dominant in the area - reneged on a debt they owed the nawab of oudh for military assistance against the marathas in 1772. the rohillas were defeated and driven from their former capital of bareilly by the nawab with the assistance of the east india company's troops lent by warren hastings.
the rohilla state of rampur was established by nawab faizullah khan on 7 october 1774 in the presence of british commander colonel champion, and remained a pliant state under british protection thereafter.
faizullah khan
khan laid the first stone of the new fort at rampur and thus rampur city was founded in 1775. originally it was a group of four villages named kather, the name of raja ram singh. the first nawab proposed to rename the city 'faizabad'. but many other places were known by the name of faizabad already existed, so the name was changed to mustafabad alias rampur. nawwab faizullah khan ruled for 20 years. he was a great patron of scholarship, and began the collection of arabic, persian, turkish and urdu manuscripts which now make up the bulk of the rampur raza library. after his death his son muhammad ali khan took over, but he was killed by the rohilla leaders after 24 days, and ghulam muhammad khan, the brother of the deceased, was proclaimed nawab. the east india company took exception to this, and after a reign of just 3 months and 22 days ghulam muhammad khan was defeated by its forces.  the governor-general made ahmad ali khan, son of the late muhammad ali khan, the new nawab. he ruled for 44 years. he did not have any sons, so muhammad sa'id khan, son of ghulam muhammad khan, took over as the new nawab. he raised a regular army, established courts and carried out many works to improve the economic conditions of farmers. his son muhammad yusuf ali khan took over after his death. his son kalb ali khan became the new nawab in 1865.
imambara, fort of rampur, uttar pradesh, ca.1911.
sir kalb ali khan, nawab of rampur (1832–1887)
nawab kalb ali khan was literate in arabic and persian. under his rule, the state did much work to uplift standards of education. he was also a member of council during the viceroyalty of lord john lawrence. he built the jama masjid in rampur at a cost of rs. 300,000. he was also knighted in agra by the prince of wales. he ruled for 22 years and 7 months. after his death his son mushtaq ali khan took over. he appointed w. c. wright as the chief engineer of the state and built many new buildings and canals. nawab hamid ali became the new ruler in 1889 at the age of 14. many new schools were opened during his reign, and many donations were provided to nearby colleges. he donated rs. 50,000 to lucknow medical college. in 1905 he built the magnificent darbar hall within the fort which now houses the great collection of oriental manuscripts held by the rampur raza library. his son raza ali khan became the last ruling nawab in 1930.
on 1 july 1949 the state of rampur was merged into the republic of india. rampur today presents a slightly decayed appearance: the palaces of the nawabs are crumbling, as are the gates and walls of the fort. however, the library remains a flourishing institution of immense value to scholars from all over the world.
nawab of rampur yusef ali khan and his family on elephants escorted by rampurian and british troops to the encampment of lord canning
the nawabs of rampur sided with the british during indian rebellion of 1857, and this enabled them to continue to play a role in the social, political and cultural life of northern india in general and the muslims of the united provinces in particular. they gave refuge to some of the literary figures from the court of bahadur shah zafar.
post independence[edit]
descendants of the nawabs include murad mian the first child of murtaza ali khan of rampur. begum noor bano, the widow of the former nawab's younger brother and ex-mp zulfiquar ali khan of rampur. begum noor bano has become a politician and won the election from rampur parliamentary constituency in 1999. she lost the elections in 2004,2009 from rampur and 2014 from moradabad consecutively. murtaza ali khan and zulfiquar ali khan (aka mikki mia), who continued to use the title of nawab as a token even after independence and abolition of royalty but never ruled rampur, are now dead. murtaza ali contested an election from rampur opposite his mother rafat jamani begum in 1972 and won. although the two brothers were always political rivals they never faced each other in elections. subsequently, the family was also involved in smuggling scandals involving some smuggling from pakistan, where one of the sons of murtaza ali is married. raza inter college, hamid inter college and murtaza inter college are three higher secondary schools named after three nawabs.
the present nawab of rampur, muhammad murad ali khan bahadur is the present titular nawab of rampur. the eldest son of murtuza ali khan bahadur, he succeeded his father as titular nawab upon the latter's death in 1982. he served as a member on the raza library board in rampur from 1993 to 2002.
