rampur-uttar-pradesh
Culture and Urdu Poetry[edit]
culture and urdu poetry[edit]
rampur is considered as third school of poetry after delhi and lucknow.  many prominent and legendary urdu poets of the time like daagh dehlvi, mirza ghalib and amir meenai joined the patronage of rampur court. nawabs of rampur were very fond of poetry and other fine arts. they provided remunerations to the poets who were associated with ' darbar.' nizam rampuri earned great name as poet. in addition, shad aarifi was another poet from rampur who evolved modern ghazal in a very distinct style.
architecture[edit]
small house fort, now known as raza library
the rulers of rampur have had distinct impact on the architecture of the region. the buildings and monuments signify the presence of mughal type architecture. some of the buildings are very old and have been built over repeatedly in course of time.
one of the most well designed monument is the fort of rampur (hindi:रामपुर का किला). it also houses the raza library or hamid manzil, the former palace of the rulers. it has a sizeable collection of oriental manuscripts in asia. the fort also houses the imambara.
the jama masjid is one of the finest piece of architecture to be found in rampur. it resembles the jama masjid in delhi to some extent. it was built by nawab faizullah khan. it has a unique mughal touch to it. there are several entry-exit gates to the masjid. it has three big domes and four tall minarets with gold pinnacles boasting of a royal touch. it has a main lofty entrance gate that has an inbuilt clock tower occupied by a big clock that was imported from britain.
there are several entry-exit gates built by the nawab. these gates are major entry-exit routes from the city. examples are shahbad gate, nawab gate, bilaspur gate etc.
music[edit]
the rampur-sahaswan gharana of hindustani classical music also has its origins in court musicians. ustad mehboob khan, was a khayal singer and veena player of the rampur court; his son ustad inayat hussain khan (1849–1919), who trained and lived in the city, founded the gharana.
cuisine[edit]
rampuri cuisine, a part of the mughal cuisine tradition, developed by the chefs of the nawabs, is also known for its distinct flavours and dishes with recipes passed on from the royal kitchen, like rampuri fish,  chicken changezi ,  pasande haleem , rampuri korma, rampuri mutton kebabs,  doodhiya biryani,  dogoshta biryani and  adrak ka halwa,  sohan halwa .
knife making[edit]
rampur was traditionally famous for the knives known as rampuri chaaku, which even made their way to bollywood crime thrillers in the 1960s and 1970s. eventually the government of uttar pradesh banned making knives longer than 4.5 inches in blade length, leading to a drop in their popularity.
rampur greyhound[edit]
the rampur greyhound is a smooth-haired sighthound native to the region, often described as being more substantially built than other greyhounds. it was the favoured hound of the nawabs for jackal coursing, but was also used to hunt lions, tigers, leopards, and panthers. mh nawab ahmad ali khan bahadur bred these dogs by combining tazi and english greyhound bloodlines.
festivals[edit]
religious practices are as much an integral part of everyday life and a very public affair as they are in the rest of india. therefore, not surprisingly, many festivals are religious in origin although several of them are celebrated irrespective of caste and creed. among the most important hindu festivals are diwali, holi and vijayadashami, mahashivaratri, ram navmi, basant panchami, sri krishna janamastmi and raksha bandhan, which are also observed by jains and sikhs. eid ul milad, eid ul-fitr, bakr-id, muharram are muslim religious festivals. mahavir jayanti is celebrated by jains, buddha jayanti by buddhists, guru nanak jayanti by sikhs and good friday, christmas by the christians.
