ranchi
Economy
economy
ranchi is one of the major industrial cities of eastern india and located in the region called 'ruhr of india' (chota nagpur) making it an ideal place for mineral based industries. ranchi has presence of many well-known government and private organisations in the vicinity of city. sail-r&d, mecon.ltd, garden reach shipbuilders & engineers (marine diesel engine project), central coalfields, cmpdi.ltd, subarnarekha hydel project (jseb), usha martin.ltd (wire rope division), dvc, stpi-ranchi, heavy engineering corp., palriwal industries, pensol india, waxpol industries, jharkhand mega food park etc. are the prominent industries here.
the federation of jharkhand chamber of commerce & industries (fjcci), assocham, msme-di and jiada are major apex industrial bodies present here. jiada consists many industrial areas in ranchi, e.g. – kokar, tatisilwai, namkum etc. are among them.
as per a study done by assocham in late 2010, ranchi was the highest employment generating tier-iii cities in india followed by mangalore and mysore. mecon ltd company has its headquarters in ranchi at ashok nagar. jharkhand industrial area development association has its office in namkum. central coalfields also has its headquarters in ranchi.
ranchi houses a number of companies. along with jamshedpur, dhanbad, bokaro and giridih it is one of the industrial hubs of the city. here are the following companies which are based in ranchi and also headquartered in ranchi itself:mecon limited, central coalfields, heavy engineering corporation, central mine planning and design institute, jharkhand rajya gramin bank and dzinex technology
the main and major businesses here are located in lalpur, hindpiri, lower bazaar, upper bazaar and doranda
stpi ranchi has set up its branch at namkum, ranchi. it is usually an it park, which houses many it companies. it is being planned to build more parks like this. offco park is another park which is built here. it is also a large and famous business park.
lalpur, doranda and hindpiri are the business districts and financial districts in the city and the state. this place houses several shopping malls. whole of ranchi has several shopping malls which include: nucleus mall, mall e decor, jd hi-street mall, ranchi central mall, laxmi tower, mall of ranchi, city center (centre) mall, big mall, spring city mall, arakshan shopping mall, shelter mall, ranchi green city, artic mall, city center or city centre, city mall and galaxia mall.
there are many other upcoming shopping malls and commercial projects
lalpur - central business district       central of ranchi is the commercial, historical, cultural, financial and economic district hub of the city ranchi       arjan place at hindpiri, ranchi houses several companies including the stock holding corporation of india limited and ricoh
