ratlam
Early history[edit]
early history[edit]

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (august 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
ratlam state was founded in 1652 by a great-grandson of raja udai singh of jodhpur, namely raja ratan singh rathore, son of mahesh das of jalore. the latter, father, and son, had performed important military services for the emperor shah jahan by defeating the persians and uzbeks in afghanistan. in reward for their services and in recognition of their great deeds of valour, large territories in the south-western districts of rajputana and northern malwa were conferred on them. their capital became ratram (named after raja ratan singh and his first son ram singh) which later got translated to ratlam.
maharaja ratan singh rathore 1652/1658, courageous in youth, he gained shah jahan's notice by calming the emperors favourite elephant which had run amok in the agra palace garden, fought for the emperor against the persians in kabul and qandahar, later in 1652, the emperor substituted jalore for the pargana of ratlam and many other areas, and he became the first raja of ratlam. in 1658 a false rumour of the death of the emperor resulted in a frenzied scramble for succession to the throne amongst his sons. dara shikoh who was officiating for his father, sent a combined army of rajputs and muslims under the command of maharaja jaswant singh of jodhpur, against his brother aurangzeb. the maharaja, as head of the rathore clan, was persuaded to hand over command of the imperial army to maharaja ratan singh. non-co-operation by the muslim commanders resulted in the army sustaining heavy losses in the fierce battle at dharmat, as well as the death of ratan singh (said to have sustained 80 sword wounds on his body).
ratan singh had married (among others), maharani sukhroopde kanwar shekhawat ji sahiba, daughter of kunwar purshottam das of jhajhar [shekhawati], and had an issue. he died in 1658 in battle at dharmat near ujjain.
the new town of ratlam was founded in 1829 by captain borthwick.
