ratlam
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
railways[edit]
ratlam junction
mahi railway bridge ratlam
ratlam junction is a major junction on delhi-mumbai and ajmer-khandwa rail routes and rail division of indian railways on broad gauge lines on western railways zone. ratlam junction is divisional headquarters of western railway zone. there are four major railway tracks passing through ratlam city, leading to mumbai, delhi, ajmer and khandwa. it is one of the major railway junction of western railways. ratlam junction experiences halt of around 157 trains on a daily basis. all the major superfast trains like rajdhani, garib rath have their staff changing stoppage at ratlam junction.
ratlam is also the first ever clean train station of indian railways network. under this scheme, indian railways has introduced cleaning of coaches of a train en route while it halts at a particular station for 15 to 20 minutes. the entire train is cleaned with vacuum cleaners and toilets are washed with handheld portable hp cleaners.
ratlam station is believed to be one of the busiest railway stations in india.
ratlam junction is referred in 2007 hindi romantic comedy film jab we met. though the shooting had not happened actually in ratlam and the places and locations mentioned in the film do not exist in the city.
roads[edit]
ratlam is connected to indore and neemuch via national highway 79. this four-lane highway runs from indore to chittorgarh to join the golden quadrilateral.
the city has regular bus services to udaipur, banswara, mandsaur, neemuch, indore, bhopal, dhar, ujjain, nagda, petlawad, jhabua etc. ratlam almost halfway points on mumbai delhi highway.
ratlam has local city transport in the form of auto rickshaws, tata magic and coming up city buses.
airport[edit]
the city does not have any airport but has an airstrip on banjali. the nearest airport is devi ahilya bai holkar airport at indore (137 kilometres [85 mi]), raja bhoj airport at bhopal (289 kilometres [180 mi]), maharana pratap airport at udaipur (252 kilometres [157 mi]), vadodara airport at vadodara (327 kilometres [203 mi]), sardar vallabhbhai patel international airport at ahmedabad (340 kilometres [210 mi]).
