rewari
Ancient[edit]
ancient[edit]
rewari founded by balarama (the elder brother of krishna), has the ruins of an ancient fort. the rewari royal family played an important role in representing the interests of ahirs in the army.

modern era[edit]

see also: haryana in 1857, ballabhgarh history, farrukhnagar history, nahar singh, and rao tula ram
delhi gate, one of the four historic british period gates in rewari
ahir royal family of ahirwal shifted the capital from mathura to tijara and later to rewari when rao's of rewari lost the battle to maratha's rewari came under the control of maratha empire maratha's made ruler of rewari their feudatory but later it became an independent state under maharaja rao tularam singh before passing on to east india company and later british raj. rao tula ram, the ruler of rewari, played a significant role in india's first war of independence in 1857. his kingdom was confiscated by the british raj and made a part of gurgaon district of punjab province.
it remained a part of gurgaon district until reorganisation in 1972 saw it transferred to mahendragarh district. further changes in 1989 led to the creation of the eponymous rewari district.
rezang la battle of 1962[edit]

main article: rezang la
rewari is well known for the high proportion of soldiers and officers it contributes to the indian army and other armed forces of india. rezang la near chushul in ladakh was the site of the last stand of c company of the 13 kumaon battalion, during the sino-indian war on 18 november 1962. the c company was composed almost entirely of ahirs and was led by major shaitan singh, who won a posthumous param vir chakra for his actions.
in this action 120 men of the c company fought until their bullets finished and then fought hand-to-hand. of the 120 men, 114 died and only six seriously injured men remained alive. of these, five were captured pow and only one came down to inform others. a memorial was constructed in rewari city for them.
the soul-stirring inscription on the war memorial at chushul, ladakh raised by indian army in the memory of the fallen brave ahirs in the battle of rezang la reads:
how can a man die better, than facing fearful odds,  for the ashes of his fathers,  and temples of his gods.
