rohtak
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
a very old and antique heritage has been preserved in rohtak. baba mast nath math, gokaran, kiloi temple, and several more such fine looking buildings erected in traditional indian and mughal styles such as spacious havelis with ornate facade, finely carved wooden door sets and sandstone pillars, mosques that were once lavishly decorated in stucco work, dharamshalas with fine looking statues of radha and krishna and temple spires and are few of them. the survey was extended to study a few large village estates such as balambha, farmana khas, lakhan majra, jassia, bhaini surjan and meham by society for peoples’ advancement, technology and heritage (sopath). the present monastery was founded by baba mast nath in 1731.
sai mandir
medieval times
a centuries-old fort was situated at rohtak, in present-day qilla mohallah. that fort was built by sheikhs of yemen under qazi sultan muhammad surkh zulqarni during ghauri dynasty kings. the then delhi emperor mahmud tughlaq posted two brothers, malik idrees and mubariz khan at that fort in 1400. the fort of rohtak was besieged by syed khizer khan in 1410 which could only succeed after a long seizure lasting six months.
british period (1800-1947)
rohtak is among the oldest organised districts of haryana; the british officers used to reside here since 1810. those british constructed a church at rohtak, which was completed in 1867. it was named as all saints church. its central hall was built by maj. feindala in the memory of his daughter athel nora, while the contribution for woodwork was given by jf bruster and rf kalenal. there are some tombstones, having dated inscriptions in the graveyard near mini secretariat building of rohtak. previously it was said to be surrounded by a garden, but now only a narrow strip of land is left for this cemetery. it has some 180-year-old historic tombstones, including one identified to be that of dc moore. this centuries old cemetery is currently in a deserted condition and a thick thorny vegetation growth has covered the tombs stones there.
