rohtak
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
view of latest sign-board
roads[edit]
rohtak is connected to seven cities by three national highways nh 9, nh 709, nh 352 (old nh 10, nh71, and nh71a) and two state highways (sh16 and sh18). national highway 9 from new delhi to rohtak is upgraded to six lanes with 30 km rohtak city bypass, so that the vehicles travelling between new delhi and hisar do not have to enter rohtak city. national highway 9 from rohtak to hissar and several cities of punjab is being widened to a four-lane highway.
national highway[edit]
three national highways, nh-9 (malaut, punjab to askot in uttarakhand), nh-709 (rajgarh, haryana to panipat, haryana) and nh-352 (narwana to rewari) pass through the city. rohtak is connected to delhi through nh-9, and currently the road is being widened to six lanes by nhai, with the plans to develop the entire corridor as an industrial area. nh-352 from rewari to rohtak is 4 lanes, and nh-709 from rohtak to panipat is 4 lanes.
railway[edit]
rohtak railway station
delhi rohtak railway line
rohtak city has a railway junction with connections to delhi, panipat, rewari, bhiwani and jind converging on the city. rohtak is connected to bahadurgarh through delhi line, to gohana through panipat line and jhajjar through rewari line. delhi and jind connections are part of the delhi-fazilka line, and the line is double tracked from delhi to bhatinda, punjab, india, and is electrified between delhi and bhatinda. all other lines are single track and electrified i.e. rohtak rewari line, rohtak hisar line (via bhiwani).
rohtak junction railway station is served by three shatabdi express services (new delhi moga shatabdi express, new delhi–firozpur shatabdi express and new delhi ludhiana shatabdi express) and ajmer chandigarh garib rath express.
the railway track between new delhi and rohtak has been electrified. emu services has been running between the two cities since march 2013.
air travel[edit]
there is currently no commercial airport serving the city. the state govt has shown interests in building a greenfield cargos airport at the meham town to serve this city and the aai has given consent in principle for this. the nearest international airport is indira gandhi international airport at delhi approx.75 km.
