rohtak
Government and politics[edit]
government and politics[edit]
there is a mini secretariat in the city, located near the court.
infrastructure[edit]
the haryana government has asked the union government to declare haryana sub-region (hsr) a zone of strategic national interest. hsr consists of 35 urban centres, including gurgaon, faridabad, panipat, sonepat and rohtak. the growth rate of urban population in the zone has been above 60 per cent, the highest among all the constituents of national capital region. these urban centres face a rapid growth in population as the workforce travels to work from here to the capital.
sectors[edit]
sector 1 rohtak
in rohtak old sectors are sector 1, sector 3, sector 14, sector 2, 4 are newly developed and new sectors 4 ext. 5, 6, 25 are being planned. model town, patel nagar, dlf colony, sector 1 and 14 are considered to be upmarket areas of the city. entrance of sector-14 is opposite to gate number 2 of maharshi dayanand university. d-park, model town comprises all branded showrooms and one of the best  places to hangout in the city. sectors 26 and 28 are relatively new. they are a part of real estate giant omaxe city's residence projects.
smart city contender[edit]
chief minister manohar lal khattar's hometown, karnal, tops the cities shortlisted by the screening committee for the ‘smart city’ tag at a meeting. faridabad was placed second while gurgaon, rohtak and hisar could seize only the third spot. the department of urban local bodies asked for recommendations for smart city contenders from all municipal bodies.
rohtak's ex mayor renu dabla (presently manmohan goyal) has stated that the process adopted for the selection of haryana districts for the smart city project was biased and based on political considerations.
facilities[edit]
view of d-park, model town
tiger yawning at rohtak zoo
the municipal corporation has prepared a strategy for future developments, that includes new residential areas, healthy environment, and maintained roads. manohar lal khattar, the haryana cm, formally launched the country's first railway elevated track project on 17 march 2018. the ambitious, 6-km track, costing around rs 316 crore, is set to come up on the rohtak-panipat line in 18 months, and the existing railway track will be replaced by a road, which will be built at the cost of rs 8 crore.
healthcare[edit]
the city hosts the pandit bhagwat dayal sharma post graduate institute of medical sciences and civil hospital, both of which are operated by the state government. there are also various privately operated medical facilities. pt b.d.sharma, pgims, rohtak has situated at a distance of about 240  km from chandigarh and about 70  km from delhi on delhi-hissar-sirsa-fazilka national highway (nh-10). it is the only major institution for medical education and research and a tertiary care centre for provision of specialised health care services not only to the people of the state of haryana, but also to those from punjab, rajasthan, delhi and western u.p.  the institute was started under the name of medical college, rohtak in the year 1960.  for the first three years, the students were admitted to medical college, patiala which acted as a host institution.  in 1963, the students were shifted to rohtak.  in the subsequent years, multifaceted expansion measures have transformed the institute into a fully developed centre of medical education and research in all the major disciplines of medicine.  in the year 1994, medical college, rohtak was renamed as pt. b.d.sharma, medical college, rohtak and subsequently, it was upgraded to a post graduate institute of medical sciences in the year 1995.  today pt. b.d.sharma, pgims, rohtak is a famous institution not only for medical education but also for the healthcare facilities both at the national as well as international level.
the institute has a remarkably well-developed campus spread over an area of 350 acres of land. during the 50 years of its existence, pt. b.d.sharma, pgims, rohtak has witnessed a phenomenal growth achieving not only its designated goals but also in expanding its horizons to set newer objectives completely commensurable with the requirements of the national goal of “health for all by 2020”.
sewerage[edit]
in ncr, out of 108 towns only 33 towns have sewerage system and even in these 33 towns, the coverage can at best be classified as partial. the network coverage in some of the important cities in ncr includes nct delhi, meerut, ghaziabad, noida, faridabad, panipat, gurgaon, rohtak, sonepat and alwar where rohtak was completed 65% in 2001 and 90% in 2011 according to an official report.
political controversy[edit]
the development of rohtak caused controversy in 2013 as a result of the allegedly disproportionate number of state development projects that have been awarded to the city by chief minister bhupinder singh hooda, who was born in a nearby village. this has led to severe criticism by both the opposition parties and some members of the governing indian national congress party, who have attacked hooda for bias. rao inderjit singh, a bjp leader from south haryana, used right to information requests to determine that from a total of 5,135 announcements of schemes in the state, 2,045 went to the three districts of rohtak, jhajjar and sonepat. these areas were in hooda's own constituency and that of his son, the lok sabha mp deepeder singh hooda. of the 3,356 completed schemes, 1,560 were from these three districts whereas 1,796 schemes were completed in the rest of the state. ambala mp selja kumari is also against the region-specific and biased development of rohtak.
the haryana urban development authority has spent over rs 3.4 billion on the development of rohtak. until 31 december 2010 collected rs 3.22 billion as external development charges in rohtak and spent almost rs 6.63 billion of the fund.
however, the most developed cities of the state based expenditure on infrastructure over the last 15 years are gurgaon, faridabad, hisar, panchkula, panipat and ambala.
