rourkela
Tourism & Recreation[edit]
tourism & recreation[edit]
hanuman vatika
rourkela has three major recreation parks in steel township area. these are indira gandhi park, jubilee park, and ispat nehru park udyaan along with the recently inaugurated community park at civil township and many other small parks in civil township area.
bhanja bhaban (comprising the bhanja kala kendra and the library) and civic centre hosts the state level and national level drama, fashion and dancing competitions throughout the year.
hanuman vatika a sprawling campus of area surrounding of 13 acres. statue of hanuman is constructed with the height of 75 feet in the year of 1994. there are also a number of temples named as bata managla, binayak, vaishnodevi, sarala, dwadash linga, siva, santoshi maa, maa laxmi etc. constructed here for the devotees. because of beauty scenario and green area, number of general visitors came to this place every day here.
the city has several cinemas, including konark, uma, apsara, deepak and razzaq (presently all of them being turned into multiplex). a couple of multiplexes however have started recently, namely psr cinemas, panposh road and cineplex, shanti towers. the latest attraction of the city is the new pvr multiplex opened inside the forum galleria mall in civil township. several food courts like ambagan food court, sector 5 vip market, sector 16 & 18 area street foods, koel nagar nac market, khana khazana, 7 am & max restaurant and bakery, the cakery bakery and paris bakery in new rourkela, green chillyz behind ambagan are some of the most visited places.
vedvyas cave
luxury shopping mall are forum galleria mall in civil township &  crossroad mall is already started with pantaloons, kfc, pizzahut, skechers etc. and other great brands available for shopping. there are many shopping malls under construction like fe2 arcade (sector 5), pluto plaza in chhend.
pitamahal dam
major tourist destinations in and around rourkela are as follows:
hanuman vatika, civil township indira gandhi park, jubilee park vedvyas (vyas cave & mahadev mandir) ispat nehru park udyaan mandira dam vaishnodevi temple, rourkela (replica of vaishnodevi temple ) khandadhar waterfall lagoon park pitamahal dam badalgiri waterfall ramakrishna mission, hamirpur, sector-19 sri sai mandir, vedvyas tarkera dam
