rourkela
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road transportation[edit]
biju expressway
towards the end of 1946, most of the existing roads of the sundargarh district were constructed. one national highway i.e. (nh-143) passes through rourkela which runs from chas-ranchi-rourkela-barkote-banarpal – junction with (nh-55). about 30  km of this highway passes through in and around rourkela. though the finalization of the project is awaited the planning for four linings of this highway is under consideration. one more national highway i.e. nh – 215 which runs from rajamunda (in sundergarh district) to panikoili in jajpur district.
other than this the sh-10 which runs from rourkela to sambalpur is another good road used in a large way particularly after its renovation and up gradation in 1995. this highway has recently been upgraded to a four-lane highway under the biju expressway project. there are a number of other departmental roads in and around rourkela stretched in different parts.
from a civic point of view, the steel city consists of two parts i.e. steel township and civil township. while the ring road constructed by rourkela steel plant authority which has surrounded the steel township the other part of the ring road is civil township. the steel township roads are also maintained by the rsp authority. there are a number of daily bus services from rourkela to different parts of orissa and also, a few, to neighboring states like chhattisgarh and jharkhand. there are a number of city buses plying daily on different routes in the city. the new bus terminus at uditnagar, rourkela constructed by rourkela development authority caters to various demands of bus services to different parts of the states. other than the new bus stand, there are a number of ticket booking counters in different parts of the city for the public to book tickets for various destinations. in 2014, government of odisha decided to build biju expressway stretching from rourkela to jagdalpur [1]
railways[edit]
rourkela railway station
rourkela railway junction is situated on the howrah-mumbai line under chakradharpur division of south-eastern railway. apart from rourkela station, the other stations in sundargarh district are bondamunda, panposh, rajgangpur, kalunga, kansbahal, etc. the city is well connected through railway to howrah & mumbai. apart from this, the city enjoys direct connectivity to delhi, chennai, bangalore, ranchi, ahmedabad, & pune and other major city's' of india. rourkela is a profit-generating junction of south-eastern railway. from rourkela junction, one line also goes to biramitrapur whereas two from bondamunda towards howrah and hatia respectively. one more line goes from bimalagarh to kiriburu.
bondamunda loco shed: two locomotive sheds, one for steam locomotives and the other for diesel locomotives, was set up in the  year 1950s. an electric locomotive shed was started in 1983 for accommodating wam-4 locomotives, which accommodates 242 electric locomotives. new electric locomotive shed is under construction to expand & enhance capacity of 200 wag-9 locomotives.
station name  station code  railway zone  total platforms  important trains   rourkela junction railway station  rou  south eastern railway zone  5   dhanbad bhubaneswar garib rath express sambalpur - jammu tawi express rourkela - gunupur rajya rani express lokmanya tilak terminus - tatanagar antyodaya express bhubaneswar rajdhani express mumbai cst–howrah duronto express howrah-mumbai mail
air transport[edit]
rourkela-airport
after inception of rourkela steel plant, the govt. of india built up an air strip at rourkela in 60's and till 1991 it was under government control. in 1991 the management and control of this air strip was transferred to steel authority of india, rourkela steel plant. as per the license agreement of director general of civil aviation (dgca) government of india, rourkela airport comes under private license category.
time to time some of the important dignitaries and vvips boarding flights are landing here but so far the regular flight has not flying from this air strip for public conveyance. the dialogue with ministry of civil aviation, govt. of india is on for using it for public purpose, specially when many low cost operators are operating from small towns. now this airport is being used by some private company and industrialists for private use by paying the required charges.
the nearest major airports are jharsuguda airport (119 km) and birsa munda airport (246 km).
airlines and destinations[edit]
airlinesdestinationsair deccankolkataair odishabhubaneswar
