rourkela
Sports[edit]
sports[edit]
hockey[edit]
the city becomes a sports hub with many stadiums and few sports academy in and around. the two stadiums are biju patnaik hockey stadium, with synthetic astroturf built by sail and ispat stadium that consist of a basketball ground, a chess hall, and a well-maintained volleyball ground nearby as well. the indoor stadium at sector-20 hosts the badminton and table tennis events. the number of academy in the city has produced many nationally and internationally acclaimed hockey players. the ispat stadium and a number of game specific facilities from odisha govt. and sail have played a key role in honing the talents of the youngsters.
india's former captains dilip tirkey, ignace tirkey and prabodh tirkey, deep defender lazarus barla started their careers in rourkela. rourkela has special hockey hostels for kids, upbringing the next generation players with some of the best amenities. it has produced a few arjuna awardees, including minati mohapatra. olympians of repute like paralympian roshan and rachita mistry are from this city. former hockey player and 1972 summer olympics bronze medal winner, michael kindo, also happens to be a current resident of the city. indian national cricketer sanjay raul and the under-19 world cup representative chandrakant barik play from this city. pabitra mohan mohanty, the former national 'b' champion in chess and second only to viswanathan anand in national 'a' category is a resident of this city.
stadiums[edit]
rourkela has an international hockey stadium with synthetic astroturf which has been host to world junior hockey championship and been a training centre to most of the international hockey players of india. ispat stadium has been host for several ranji trophy matches and youth odis. the city has produced many reputed ranji players in the recent times. rsp does promote various different sports like – cycling, boxing, archery, soccer and lots more.
biju patnaik hockey stadium
sport stadium
birsa munda international hockey stadium is under-construction biju patnaik hockey stadium (sector-5) ispat stadium (sector-6) indoor stadium (sector-20) sports hostel, panposh ispat mini stadium, fertiliser township (sector-22)
sports player
hockey:
binita toppo (female hockey) dilip tirkey lazarus barla ignace tirkey prabodh tirkey (younger brother of ignace tirkey) birendra lakra
other sports:
rachita mistry ( sprinter ) natraj behera ( cricket )
