rourkela
Education[edit]
education[edit]

main article: education in rourkela

further information: list of schools and colleges in rourkela
biju patnaik university of technology one of the biggest state-run universities in odisha
rourkela is the educational, technical and medical research hub of western odisha and even students from all parts of odisha and some parts of neighboring states bihar, jharkhand and west bengal come here to pursue higher education. city houses many english medium schools which provide cbse and icse certificates to their students.
there are icse-isc board schools like sri aurobindo's rourkela school, st. paul's school, mt. carmel school, st. joseph's convent school, ispat english medium school, indo english school, chinmaya vidyalaya(e.m.), mgm english medium school, desouza's school, st. thomas school, st. mary's school, loreto english school. most of them are missionary based organizations run by licensee trustees. the students of various schools in rourkela represent their schools in various national and international level competitions including imo, icho, and nasa.
the cbse board schools include deepika english medium school, delhi public school, guru nanak public school (gnps), dayanand anglo-vedic (dav) school and st. arnold school. the central government has its own kendriya vidyalaya in sector-6 and in bondamunda. it also has notable odia medium schools like chinmaya vidyalaya, saraswati shishu vidya mandir (sector-6), ispat vidyalaya (sector 18) and baji rout high school.
ugie, rourkela main campus
utkalmani gopabandhu institute of engineering, rourkela also called the ugie is a state governmental diploma engineering institution in the western zone of odisha, which was established in 1962 under the directorate of technical education and training (dtet), odisha.
rourkela has a hi-tech medical college and hospital rourkela and is the only city in odisha to have a private medical college outside bhubaneshwar. the local leaders have demanded a government medical college in rourkela.
there are over 15 colleges for arts, science, and commerce streams under the sambalpur university. some of the famous ones are government autonomous college, rourkela municipal college, ispat college, sg women's college. there are also private engineering & management colleges like rourkela institute of management studies (rims), damits, rourkela institute of technology (rit), kanak manjari institute of pharmaceutical sciences(kmips), padmanava college of engineering (pce) these colleges come under the jurisdiction of biju patnaik university of technology (bput) and the head office is located in chennd, rourkela.
universities[edit]

nit rourkela main gatebput main campus
national institute of technology rourkela: nit rourkela is one of india's premier technical institute, and is recognised as an  institute of national importance. its foundation stone was laid by the first prime minister of india, jawaharlal nehru in the year of 1961. it was granted autonomy in 2002 and now functions independently under the ministry of education. research at the institute carried out at one of the high-tech collaborative centers, such as the centre for robotics and space technology incubation centre.
biju patnaik university of technology: (bput) head-quarters in rourkela came into being in november 2002 through an act of the odisha state legislature and foundation stone was laid by a.p.j. abdul kalam, the hon’ble president of india. the main objective of university is to ensure a high quality of students coming out of the technical colleges through a common curriculum and uniform evaluation.
