rourkela
History[edit]
history[edit]
the name rourkela originates from the local language of sadri which means "your village" (rour = your & kela comes from the word "kila" which means village). it comes under sundergarh district of the indian state of odisha.
the twin towns of rourkela and fertilizer township, as well as their developed periphery, are located in areas that were once covered by dense forests. these forests were once a favourite hunting ground for the kings in the past. according to the census report of 2011, rourkela has a population of 483,038 (rourkela industrial township is 273,217 and rourkela town is 210,412) and the urban metropolitan area population is 536,450. then railway station of rourkela was within the revenue village of mahulpali.
india's first public sector steel plant facility was established in rourkela with the help of german businesses krupp and demag. in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the town was the largest german colony outside germany.
there was a village called durgapur in between rourkela and panposh stations. the construction of the sub-divisional court building was started in 1945 at the village durgapur. hence the nearby hills were also known as durgapur pahada (durgapur hills), today it is known as uditnagar. as a result, the two railway stations of panposh and rourkela came into recognition.
following india's independence, pandit jawaharlal nehru, the first prime minister of india, wanted to make india an industrialized state in soviet model of social development; giving wings to his dreams, sri biju pattanaik convinced pandit nehru to consider the location of rourkela for setting up a steel plant. the mineral-rich zone of rourkela intersected by the rivers brahmani, koel and sankha from two sides was aptly chosen for the same.
the preliminary survey for the steel plant at rourkela was started in 1952 and the government of odisha issued a gazette notification on 16 february 1954. in accordance with the notification, the government of odisha acquired an area of about 80 square miles around rourkela for the purpose of steel plant. the german private companies krupp and demag came forward to provide financial and technical help for the proposed steel plant at rourkela. krupp built rourkela steel plant drawing from experience from its own works in essen, germany. the technical experts of the company advised the government of india as well as the government of odisha for acquiring more land. as a result, a further area of 32 square kilometres was acquired out of 31 revenue villages. almost 13,000 people in 2,424 families lost their dwelling. later further 11,000 acres (4,500 ha) of land were acquired out of 31 revenue villages for the construction of mandira dam, a water embankment. moreland was requisitioned for the purpose of constructing railway lines to hatia and barsuan. the construction of the bondamunda railway junction required the further acquisition of land which resulted in 20,000 people's displacement from their habitat. though there was initial discontentment among the tribals about the land acquisition the authority largely resolved the land dispute, as many of the tribals were provided employment and accommodation. the displaced tribals were relocated to places such as jalda, jhirpani, bisra, and bondamunda. their new settlement even extended beyond the river koel.
thousands of technical personnel from west germany came to rourkela to extend their technical assistance. some of these germans came with their family and their small diaspora created the 'indo-german club' to socialise. the club exists today with a well-stocked library known as max muller library. there are a plethora of local stories of germans social encounters with tribals (local adivasis) and people from other parts of india who had relocated themselves to rourkela for employment. a large part of this population was from coastal and western odisha who were trained by the german workforce to adapt to the steel plant's technology rigour. the steel plant, which was hugely surrounded by forest, many times witnessed wild animals straying into the plant area. a royal bengal tiger's lugubrious death in the steel plant's massive blast furnace is a part of the city's folklore. there were also tales about the disappearance of germans in the nearby vedvyas cave and the dread whirlpool of river koel. the river still accounts for human casualty as some day-trippers wade into the water unaware of the maelstrom.
