salem-tamil-nadu
Administration and politics[edit]
administration and politics[edit]
municipal corporation officials   mayor    commissioner christuraj   deputy mayor vacant   member of legislative assembly   salem north r. rajendhran   salem west arul ramadoss   salem south balasubramanian   member of parliament   salem (lok sabha constituency) s. r. parthiban
municipal corporation[edit]
salem collectorate
cannon at salem corporation headquarters
salem is the headquarters of salem district. the town was constituted as a municipality in 1867, and was upgraded to a special-grade municipality in 1979 and to a municipal corporation on 1 april 1994. the salem municipal corporation has 72 wards, each with an elected councillor. the functions of the municipal corporation are divided into six departments: general administration and personnel, engineering, revenue, public health, city planning and information technology (it). all six departments are governed by a municipal commissioner. legislative power is vested in the 60-member council, headed by an elected chairperson and assisted by a deputy chairperson.
state assembly[edit]
in 2008, the constituencies of salem were redrawn as salem north, salem south and salem west. the city elects the three members to the tamil nadu legislative assembly once every five years. present mlas are r. rajendhran (salem north) from desiya murpokku dravidar kazhagam, arul ramadoss (salem west) from paattali makkal katchi and balasubramanian (salem south) from all india anna dravida munnetra kazhagam.
parliament[edit]
the city is part of the salem lok sabha constituency. the current member of parliament from the constituency is s. r. parthiban from the dmk.
law enforcement[edit]
salem central prison
law and order is maintained by the salem city subdivision of the tamil nadu police, headed by a police commissioner. special units include prohibition enforcement, district crime, social justice and human rights, district crime records and a district-level special branch headed by a superintendent of police.
salem district have central prison at hastampatti . it's one of the oldest jail and can able to host 1431 in house prisoners.
