salem-tamil-nadu
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
trumpet exchange
a newly renovated salem junction's entrance
road[edit]
salem has six arterial roads: omalur road, cherry road, saradha college road, junction main road, trichy road and attur road. three national highways originate from or pass through salem:  nh 44 (srinagar via madurai and tirunelveli kanyakumari), nh 544 (salem – kochi via erode and coimbatore and tiruppur )and nh 79 (salem – ulundurpet).
salem is the headquarters of the salem division of tnstc. the city has two major bus stations: the mgr integrated bus terminus in meyyanoor and the town bus station (old bus stand) in the town area. intercity and interstate routes and private buses originate at the central bus stand (new bus stand), and local buses originate at the old bus stand. the anna flyover is the oldest in the city, and the trumpet interchange was built in the realignment of nh 544 to ease traffic towards coimbatore. a new double-decker flyover runs within main city centres like new bus stand, 5 roads, saratha college road, 4 roads to ease congestion on these roads. it is the longest double-decker flyover in tamil nadu covering a length of 7.87 km.
the town bus terminus is being upgraded into a double decker bus terminus, the first of this kind in the state under the smart city scheme . the terminal building of the new bus terminus is also reconstructed under the smart city scheme.
a new bus port has also been proposed for the city at jagirammapalayam near it park with an area of about 61 acres. this includes a bypass road to connect the ayothiapattinam area of the city with the bus port.
other bus stands include the omalur bus station and attayampatti bus station in the outskirts of the city.
rail[edit]
salem junction is an a-1 category iso-14001 certified railway junction located in suramangalam area, 5 kilometres (3.1 mi) west of the city. in 2005, the railway board approved the creation of a salem railway division from palakkad and tiruchirapalli divisions. it is the fourth-largest of the six southern railway zone divisions. salem railway junction has been rated as the cleanest station among the divisional headquarters railway stations and also the ninth cleanest railway station in the entire country, according to a survey report published in june 2017. other major railway stations catering to the city include salem town, salem market, omalur junction, karuppur railway station and ayothiapattinam railway station.
air[edit]
salem airport
salem airport (iata sxv, icao vosm) is located on the salem-bengaluru highway (nh44) in kaamalapuram about 15 kilometres (9.3 mi) from the city. airports authority of india (aai) opened the airport in 1993 for commercial operations. kingfisher airlines flew from chennai but ended its service in october 2011 due to low occupancy. trujet started services to chennai in march 2018 as a part of the udaan scheme by government of india as well as air odisha gives connectivity to bengaluru and pondicherry from june 2018. the nearest major airports are tiruchirappalli (152 km) and coimbatore (148 km).
