salem-tamil-nadu
History[edit]
history[edit]

this section needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "salem, tamil nadu" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (september 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
early period[edit]
during the third century bce, there was period of bogar – a notable tamil siddhar and at that time jainism and buddhism arrived. around the beginning of the common era, the existence of a culturally and economically advanced society in salem two thousand years ago is evident from the discovery of silver coins of the roman emperor tiberices claudices nero (37–68 ce) in koneripatti of salem in 1987. later pandya dynasty started ruling the region around salem. later pallava dynasty rises in salem. after that mahendra varma pallava came to salem and saivite principles rise. after mahednra varma pallava, narasimha varma pallava came. soon pandya dynasty came to salem. the hoysala rule established in salem and parts of few salem remained under pandya dynasty.
medieval period[edit]
the city has been a part of chola dynasty. a mosque in the city is believed to be built by tipu sultan the ruler of mysore kingdom in the present day of karnataka. the town and the surrounding hilly regions were part of the chola dynasty and was part of the trade route with the roman empire. it was later governed by poligars, who built temples and forts in and around the city. it was part of the vijayanagara empire before being captured by hyder ali during the early 18th century, after the mysore-madurai war. it was ceded to the british in 1768 and the area became part of the struggle between kongu nadu led by dheeran chinnamalai and the british.
modern period[edit]
salem became part of salem district since independence in 1947. salem district was the first district to be formed in india on 4 april 1792 that spread over 7,530 sq km comprising the present-day namakkal, dharmapuri, krishnagiri. alexander reed was the collector of the salem district from 1792 to 1799.
until 2008, the city was part of the salem i and salem ii assembly constituencies.
