sambalpur
Education[edit]
education[edit]

main article: education in sambalpur
sambalpur university
the pre-collegiate medium of instruction in schools is predominantly english and odia. the medium of instruction in educational institutions after matriculation in colleges is english. other media of instruction also exist in sambalpur. schools and colleges in sambalpur are either government-run or run by private trusts and individuals. the schools are affiliated with either the orissa state board under bse or chse, indian certificate of secondary education (icse) and the central board for secondary education (cbse). after completing 10 years of schooling in secondary education, students enroll in higher secondary school, specialising in one of the three streams – arts, commerce or science.
since the 2000s, there have been a large number of professional institutions established in a variety of fields. the earliest schools established in sambalpur were the csb zilla school (1852) and the lady lewis girls high school (1942). vss medical college was established in 1959 and vssut in 1956. high school for blind (1972) and high school for deaf and dumb (1972), burla are govt. educational institutions imparting education to physically challenged children.
sambalpur football academy
sambalpur kala parishad is the pioneering organisation for the promotion of sambalpuri dance, and has been responsible for the revolutionary growth of this dance. it imparts education and training on this form of dance.
educational institutions in the city include gangadhar meher university,  government women's college, netaji subhash chandra bose college, lajpat rai law college, silicon institute of technology, sambalpur, delhi public school, kendriya vidyalaya, st. joseph's convent higher secondary school (sjc-sbp), gurunanak public school, madnawati public school (mps), indian public school (ips), st. john's school, seven hills residential school (shrs), sri aurobindo school (saiie&r) and dav public school. a new indian institute of management, sambalpur (iim) has been set up in the city. the sambalpur chapter of the institute of cost accountants of india was set up in 2010.
