sambalpur
History[edit]
history[edit]
the fort at sambalpur in 1825 (british library)

main articles: history of sambalpur, timeline of sambalpur, and sambalpur state
artifacts have been discovered that indicate settlement in prehistoric times. some historians identify it as the city of "sambalaka" mentioned by the second century ce roman geographer ptolemy, who mentioned that the city produces diamonds. in the fourth century ce, the gupta emperor conquered the territory of "dakshina koshala", comprising roughly present day sambalpur, bilaspur, and raipur. in the early sixth century ce chalukya king pulakesin ii is said to have conquered south kosala by defeating the then panduvamsi king balarjuna sivagupta. the next dynasty to rule south kosala was the sombvamsi dynasty.  somavamshi king janamajaya-i mahabhavagupta (circa 882–922 ce ) consolidated the eastern part of kosala comprising the modern undivided sambalpur and bolangir districts and established matrimonial relationship with the bhauma-kara dynasty ruling over the coastal modern odisha. after uddyotakeshari (c. 1040–1065 c.e.), the somavamshi kingdom declined gradually. the dynasty lost its territories to the nagas in the north-west, and the gangas in the south. after the decline of somvamshis the area came under telugu chodas for a short period. the last telugu choda king of south kosala was somesvara iii who was defeated by kalachuri king jajalladeva-i around 1119 ce. the kalachuris had an intermittent conflict with the ganga dynasty of utkala (present-day coastal odisha). ultimately kalachuris lost the sambalpur sonepur region to gangas during reign of anangabhima deva-iii (1211–1238 c.e.). the ganga kingdom ruled the sambalpur region for two more centuries, but faced aggression of the bengal sultanate from the north and vijayanagara and bahmani empires of the south. these struggles weakened the ganga hold on sambalpur. ultimately ramai deva, a chauhan rajput from north india founded chauhan rule in western orissa.
statue of veer surendra sai at jail chhak
sambalpur came under the bhonsle of nagpur when the maratha conquered sambalpur in 1800. after the third anglo-maratha war in 1817, the british government returned sambalpur to the chauhan king, jayant singh, but his authority over the other princely states was taken out.
in january 1896, hindi was made the official language of sambalpur, replacing the odia language, which after violent protests was reinstated again. during the partition of bengal in 1905 sambalpur and the adjacent odia-speaking tracts were amalgamated with the odisha division under bengal presidency. bengal's odisha division became part of the new province of bihar and odisha in 1912, and in april 1936 became the separate province of odisha, with addition of undivided ganjam and koraput districts from madras presidency. after indian independence on 15 august 1947, odisha became an indian state. the rulers of the princely states of western odisha acceded to the government of india in january 1948 and became part of odisha state.
from 1825 to 1827, lieutenant colonel gilbert (1785–1853), later lieutenant general sir walter gilbert, 1st baronet, g.c.b., was the political agent for the south west frontier with headquarters at sambalpur. several paintings made during his stay at sambalpur by an unknown artist are currently in the british library and victoria and albert museum.
vajrayana buddhism[edit]
although it is generally accepted that tantric buddhism first developed in the country of uddiyana or odra desha under king indrabhuti, there is an old and well known scholarly dispute as to whether uddiyana or odra was in the swat valley, odisha or some other place.
indrabhuti, the oldest known king of sambalpur, founded vajrayana, while his sister, who was married to yuvaraja jalendra of lankapuri (suvarnapur), founded sahajayana. these new tantric cults of buddhism introduced the mantra, mudra and mandala along with six tantric abhicharas (practices) such as marana, stambhana, sammohana, vidvesan, uchchatana and vajikarana. the tantric buddhist sects made efforts to raise the dignity of the lowest of the low of the society to a higher plane. it revived primitive beliefs and practices a simpler and less formal approach to the personal god, a liberal and respectful attitude towards women and denial of caste system.
from the seventh century a.d. onwards, many popular religious elements of heterogeneous nature were incorporated into mahayana buddhism which finally resulted in the origin of vajrayana, kalachakrayana and sahajayana tantric buddhism. tantric buddhism first developed in uddiyana, a country which was divided into two kingdoms, sambhala and lankapuri. sambhala has been identified with sambalpur and lankapuri with subarnapura (sonepur).
