sasaram
History[edit]
history[edit]
during the vedic age, sasaram was a part of the ancient kashi kingdom. sasaram name is originated from the sahastrarama, meaning a thousand groves. sasaram was once also named shah serai (meaning "place of king") as it is the birthplace of the afghan king sher shah suri, who ruled over delhi, much of northern india, what is now pakistan, and eastern afghanistan for five years, after defeating the mughal emperor humayun. many of sher shah suri's governmental practices were adopted by the mughals and the british raj including taxation, administration, and the building of a paved road from kabul to bengal, also called the grand trunk road.
sher shah suri's 122 feet (37 m) red sandstone tomb, built in the indo-afghan style stands in the middle of an artificial lake in sasaram. it borrows heavily from the lodhi style, and was once covered in blue and yellow glazed tiles indicating an iranian influence. the massive free standing dome also has an aesthetic aspect of the buddhist stupa style of the mauryan period. the tomb of sher shah's father hasan khan suri is also at sasaram, and stands in the middle of a green field at sherganj, which is known as sukha rauza. about a kilometer to the north west of sher shah's tomb lies the incomplete and dilapidated tomb of his son and successor, islam shah suri. sasaram also has a baulia, a pool used by the emperor's consorts for bathing.
the fort of sher shah suri at rohtasgarh is in sasaram. this fort has a history dating back to the 7th century ad. it was built by raja harishchandra, known for his truthfulness in the name of his son rohitashwa. it houses the churasan temple, ganesh temple, diwan-e khas, diwan-e-aam, and various other structures dating back to different centuries. the fort also served as the headquarters of raja man singh during his reign as the governor of bihar and bengal under the regime of akbar. the rohtaas fort in bihar should not be confused with another fort of the same name, near jhelum, punjab, in what is now pakistan. the rohtaas fort in sasaram was also built by sher shah suri, during the period when humayun was exiled from hindustan.
there is a temple of goddess tarachandi, two miles to the south, and an inscription of pratap dhawal on the rock close to the temple of chandi devi. hindus in large number assemble to worship the goddess. dhuwan kund, located about 36 km (22 mi).
there are several monuments near sasaram, the headquarter of rohtas district, including akbarpur, deomarkandey, rohtas garh, shergarh, tarachandi, dhuwan kund, gupta dham, bhaluni dham, historical gurudwara and tombs of chandan shaheed, hasan khan sur, sher shah, salim sah and alawal khan.
rohtas, south of sasaram, is known to have been the residence of one satyawadi raja harischandra, named for his son, rohitashwa.
minor rock edict of ashoka[edit]
sasaram is also famous for an inscription by ashoka (one of the thirteen minor rock edicts), situated in a small cave of kaimur hill, near chandan shaheed.
the edict is located near the top of the terminal spur of the kimur range near sasaram. there is the minor rock edict #1 only ashoka famously mentions pre-existing stone pillars in the edict: "...and where there are stone pillars here in my dominion, there also cause it to be engraved.".  wikiminiatlas24°56′29″n 84°02′18″e﻿ / ﻿24.94138°n 84.03833°e﻿ / 24.94138; 84.03833
the sasaram edict (minor rock edict no.1 only). devanampriya [speaks] thus. .................. years since i am a lay-worshipper (upasaka). but (i had) not been very zealous. a year and somewhat more (has passed) since ............ and men in jambudvipa, being during that time unmingled with the gods, have (now) been made (by me) mingled with the gods. [for] this is the fruit [of zeal]. ...........cannot be reached by (persons of) high rank alone, (but) even a lowly (person) is able to attain even the great heaven if he is zealous. now, for the following purpose (has) this proclamation (been issued), (that) both the lowly and the exalted may be zealous, and (that) even (my) borderers may know (it), and (that this) zeal may be of long duration, and this matter will (be made by me to) progress, and will (be made to) progress even considerably; it will (be made to) progress to one and a half, to at least one and a half. and this proclamation (was issued by me) on tour. two hundred and fifty-six nights (had then been) spent on tour, — (in figures) 256. and cause ye this matter to be engraved on rocks. and where there are stone pillars here (in my dominions), there also cause (it) to be engraved. — sasaram edict (translated in inscriptions of asoka. new edition by e. hultzsch)
the edict is located on top of the terminal spur of the kimur range.       the name jambudīpasi for "india" (brahmi script) in the sahasram minor rock edict of ashoka, circa 250 bce.       transcription of the edict.       the number "256" towards the end of the edict.
