sasaram
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
road[edit]
sasaram is well connected both by road and railways. the nh 19 (old number: nh 2; grand trunk road) passes through the city. the main mode of local transportation are buses operated by both private operators and the state government. the private buses are more frequent and connected to most of the local bazaars.  nh 19 connects delhi in the north-west via varanasi, mirzapur, allahabad, kanpur and kolkata in east via gaya, dhanbad.
there are also many ac buses available for sasaram to new delhi, patna, bokaro, ranchi, tata.
railway[edit]
sasaram station
sasaram has a big size railway junction. the station belongs to a class category with 8 platforms. the station has to be developed as the world-class which is located at the centre of the city on the grand trunk road. sasaram's other stations are shivsagar, kumahu, nokha,  karwandiya, pahleja and dehri on sone.
sasaram station is 101 kilometers away from pt. deen dayal upadhaya station (less than 1.5 hours) and about 120 km (75 mi), or two hours journey from varanasi, and 101 km (63 mi) from gaya station. gaya station is 20 km (12 mi) away bodh gaya, the most sacred place in buddhism. trains run from sasaram to kolkata, ara, ranchi, patna, new delhi, and bikramganj, bombay.
the trains which stop in sasaram include ajmer seldah, kalka mail, purushottam express, mahabodhi express, ranchi garib rath, kolkata mail, jodhpur howrah express, chambal express, shipra express, chennai egmore express, nandan kanan express, neelanchal express and poorva express, jallianwalabagh express, durigana express, garbha express, dikshabhoomi express and new delhi-  bhagalpur express, etc.
a direct weekly ac train had been started from sasaram to anand vihar terminal in july 2011 (22409/22410 - sasaram - anand vihar garib rath express). however, now this ac train runs between gaya and anand vihar terminal, still stopping at sasaram junction.
airport[edit]
sasaram has also a small and old airport called suara airport. a new airport is proposed to be established in near future.
