sasaram
"sahasram" redirects here. for the 2010 film, see sahasram (film).
this article has multiple issues. please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page. (learn how and when to remove these template messages)  this article may require cleanup to meet wikipedia's quality standards. the specific problem is: later sections in the article are not properly formatted. please help improve this article if you can. (october 2012) (learn how and when to remove this template message) this article needs additional citations for verification. please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. unsourced material may be challenged and removed.find sources: "sasaram" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · jstor (march 2011) (learn how and when to remove this template message) this article's tone or style may not reflect the encyclopedic tone used on wikipedia. see wikipedia's guide to writing better articles for suggestions. (october 2020) (learn how and when to remove this template message)   this article uses bare urls, which are uninformative and vulnerable to link rot. please consider converting them to full citations to ensure the article remains verifiable and maintains a consistent citation style. several templates and tools are available to assist in formatting, such as reflinks (documentation), refill (documentation) and citation bot (documentation). (august 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)   (learn how and when to remove this template message)
city in bihar, india
sasaram 𑂮𑂰𑂮𑂰𑂱𑂩𑂰𑂧citytop left to right maa tara chandi temple, sher shah suri's tomb, sher garh fort, buddha statue at sasaram, sasaram junction and kandahar quilalocation in sasaram blocksasaramlocation in bihar, indiasasaramsasaram (india)show map of biharshow map of indiashow allcoordinates: 24°57′n 84°02′e﻿ / ﻿24.95°n 84.03°e﻿ / 24.95; 84.03coordinates: 24°57′n 84°02′e﻿ / ﻿24.95°n 84.03°e﻿ / 24.95; 84.03country indiastatebihardivisionpatnadistrictrohtasgovernment • typemunicipal corporation (updated) • bodysasaram municipal corporation • member of parliamentchhedi paswan  (bhartiya janta party) • district magistratedharmendra kumar, indian administrative service  • superintendent of policeashish bharti, indian police service • divisional forest officerpradyumn gaurav, indian forest serviceelevation110 m (360 ft)population (2020) • total358,283demonymsasaramitelanguage • officialhindi • additional officialurdu • regionalbhojpuritime zoneutc+5:30pin821115, 821113, 821114telephone code06184vehicle registrationbr-24railway stationsasaram junctionwebsiteofficial district website
sasaram (english: // (listen))sometimes also spelled as sahasram, is an ancient historical city and a municipal corporation region in the rohtas district of the bihar state in eastern india, with a history that goes to thousands of years. during the prehistoric age, buddha walked through this way and lived for some days and then travelled to gaya to be enlightened with verity and wisdom under the mahabodhi tree, the city is also known as gateway of "vihar" to visit rest  "bihar" including gaya, rajgriha, and nalanda.
it has also served as the capital of the sur dynasty during shershah suri ruled over india in 16th century, and was residence place sub capital of epic monarch sahstrabahu ( kartivirya arjuna's ). the rohtasgarh fort, one of the world's oldest forts, has served as the capital for several dynasties, britishers and other rulers, including shershah suri and akbar governor king man singh, as well as the shashanka and kharvar empires. the historical fort has been linked to both political and revolutionary activities. it is not only bihar's, even india's, oldest fort. it was also shershah suri's capital palace when he ruled india.
sasaram and the kaimur mountain range is a nature's blessed land now a prime hot tourist destination for nature's lovers, enriched by numerous spectacular waterfalls, lakes, rivers and picturesque locations as it is described by ain-i-akbari it has over 200 waterfalls emerges during rainy season and few among them are extremely exotic gorgeous to explore.i.e. dharohar - karamchat waterfall, geetaghat heaven holy waterfall, panari ghat/gaurav waterfalls, manjharkund, dhuvan kund, sitakund, kashish, mahadev khoh & tutla bhavani waterfalls are among the most famous. telhar kund, karkat garh, mundeshwari waterfall, bansi khoh, netua kund, and chandradhari waterfalls are also well known in the nearby city in kaimur mountain range.
modern sasaram city covers the largest sub-metropolitan area of bihar. it has many famous religious and historical spots to visit such as shershah tomb, rohtasgarh fort, indrapuri dam, karamchat dam shergarh fort, kandhar fort, sacred tarachandi shaktipith, bhaluni dham, mahadev khoh, chaurasan temple, gupta dham, tutla bhawani temple, pilot baba dham, godaila pahad temple, anicat dam, eco park and the many, the entire district is surrounded by the most scenic mountain beauty of kaimur range, rivers and productive fields.
sasaram city is located in the middle of its other sub-towns like nokha & kudra which has a large number of agriculture based industries and the city is also emerging as an educational hub. it is situated in the middle of other industrial twin towns like dehri-on-sone, dalmianagar, sonnagar, amjhor, nokha and banjari.
the main posh places of the sub-metropolitan area are raj colony, gauraxni, new area, takiya bazar, tomb area and fazalganj commercial zones, sahu cinemax - mall & railway cricket stadium area. several malls have been opened along with the best 3-4 star hotels with good medical facilities in the city and is a medical hub of old shahabad district too.
sasaram city region is the administrative headquarters of rohtas district, bihar india. it became a district carved out from shahabad district in 1972. this district headquarter is best known for having the highest literacy rate and highest agricultural & forest cover area of bihar. sasaram is also the headquarters of a community development block of the same name, with a total population of 358,283 as of 2011, making it the most populous block in rohtas district.
it is known for the production of cement, fertilizers, stone chips, and for the quarrying industry and also sasaram district is popularly known as the "bowl of rice".
major languages spoken in this region are bhojpuri, hindi, english and urdu; religions include hinduism, islam, buddhism, christianity, sikhism, and jainism.
