satara-(city)
Government and politics[edit]
government and politics[edit]
satara city falls under satara lok sabha constituency, represented by mp shriniwas patil from the nationalist congress party. the city also elects an mla from the satara vidhan sabha constituency, represented by bjp's shivendrasinh abhayasinh bhosale.
civic administration[edit]
satara is a municipal council city in district of satara, maharashtra. satara municipal council, with population of about 1.2 lakh is satara sub district's only municipal council located in satara sub district of satara district in the state maharashtra in india. total geographical area of satara municipal council is 8 square km. population density of the city is 14748 persons per square km.
the satara city is divided into 39 wards for which elections are held every 5 years. among them satara ward no 19 is the most populous ward with population of 4691 and satara ward no 23 is the least populous ward with population of 2206.
civic utilities[edit]
water from the kaas lake is supplied to satara city for drinking purposes. maharashtra jeevan pradhikaran supplies water to satara city. 19 mld is supplied , but because of water leakage during transmission, only 17.2 mld gets supplied effectively.
satara municipal council is responsible for providing sanitation and solid waste management services in the city, through private contractors. 70 mt/day of solid waste is generated per day. 18 mt/ day is disposed off through composting. 8.17 sq km of the city, covering 20972 households, are covered under door to door collection.
12.8 mld of sewage is generated in the city. satara municipal council has plans to construct a stp of 17.5 mld capacity.
the maharashtra right to public service act, 2015 is a revolutionary act. citizens can get complete information regarding which services are available under this act by accessing either the mobile app rts maharashtra or ‘aaple sarkar’ web portal. citizens can even apply online for availing these services.
