shimla
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
the people of shimla are informally called shimlaites. with largely cosmopolitan crowds, a variety of festivals are celebrated here. the shimla summer festival, held every year during peak tourist season, and lasting 3–4 days, is celebrated on the ridge. the highlights of this event include performances by popular singers from all over the country. since 2015, 95.0 big fm and himachal tourism have been jointly organising a seven-day long winter carnival on the ridge from christmas to new year's.
shimla has several places to visit. local hangouts like the mall and the ridge area in the heart of the city. most of the heritage buildings in the city are preserved in their original 'tudorbethan' architecture. the former viceregal lodge, which now houses the indian institute of advanced study, and wildflower hall, now a luxury hotel, are some of the famous ones. a collection of paintings, jewellery, and textiles of the region can be found at the state museum (built-in 1974).
lakkar bazaar, a market extending off the ridge, sells souvenirs and crafts made of wood. tatta pani, 55 kilometres (34.2 mi) from the main city, is the name of hot sulphur springs that are believed to have medicinal value located on the banks of the river satluj. shimla is also home to south asia's only natural ice skating rink. state and national level competitions are often held at this venue. shimla ice skating club, which manages the rink, hosts a carnival every year in january, which includes a fancy dress competition and figures skating events. due to the effects of global warming and increasing urban development in and around shimla, the number of sessions on the ice every winter has been decreasing in the past few years.
skating at simla, c. 1905
shimla has many temples and is often visited by devotees from nearby towns and cities. the kali bari temple, dedicated to the hindu goddess kali is near the mall. jakhoo temple, for the hindu god hanuman, is located at the highest point in shimla. sankat mochan, another hanuman temple, is famous for the numerous monkeys that are always found in its vicinity. it is located on shimla-kalka highway about 10 kilometres (6.2 mi) from the city. the nearby temple of tara devi is a place for performing rituals and festivals. other prominent places of worship include a gurudwara near the bus terminus and christ church on the ridge.
a folk celebration in shimla
shimla arts and crafts are highly in demand by tourists. they range from excellent pieces of jewellery, embroidered shawls and garments to leather made articles and sculptures. shimla is full of pine and deodar trees. the wood has been extensively used in all major buildings of shimla. the various kinds of crafts of shimla made out of wood include small boxes, utensils, image carvings, and souvenirs.
the carpet-making of shimla is a great attraction for tourists. different floral and other motifs are used. wool is used to making blankets and rugs. the embroidery includes handkerchiefs, hand fans, gloves, and caps.
the shawls of shimla are very well known for their fine quality. the leathercraft of shimla comprises shoes, slippers, and belts. the other arts and crafts of shimla include a huge collection of beaded and metal jewellery.
the culture of shimla throwbacks religious, agnostic kumauni people with a simple lifestyle living away from the hustle and bustle of metro cities.
shimla has the largest natural ice skating rink in south asia. the ice skating season usually begins at the start of december and goes on until the end of february. the city has sporting venues like the indira gandhi rajya khel parisar, the main sports complex, a golf course at annadale and further out from the city is another nine-hole golf course at  naldehra, the oldest of its kind in india. kufri is a ski resort (winter only) located 19 kilometres (11.8 mi) from the main city. shimla is also part of the wider western pahari cultural belt which extends until murree, pakistan.
