shimla
Education[edit]
education[edit]

see also: list of educational institutions in shimla
public library on the ridge
the city has 13 anganwadis and 64 primary schools. there are many schools from the british era. some of the popular convent schools in the city are bishop cotton school, convent of jesus and mary (chelsea), st. edward's school, auckland house school, loreto convent (tara hall). bishop cotton school and st. edward's school, shimla are for boys only, whereas, loreto convent, tara hall and convent of jesus and mary, chelsea is for girls only. other public schools include dav public school new shimla, shimla public school, himalayan international school and s.d. senior secondary school.
indira gandhi medical college and hospital at shimla
the medical institutes in shimla include indira gandhi medical college and st. bede's, a girls-only college. government college, sanjauli is also located in the city. the indian institute of advanced study, housed in the viceregal lodge, is a residential centre for research in humanities, indian culture, religion, and social and natural sciences. the himachal pradesh university (state university of himachal pradesh) is also located in shimla. himachal pradesh university business school (hpubs) and university institute of information technology, himachal pradesh university (uiit), a premier technical education institute, himachal pradesh national law university, shimla are also located here.
there is one private university, apg (alakh prakash goyal) shimla university. it was named the best university in hills by assocham india.
shimla has two state libraries with a collection of over 47,000 old books divided between them. the one at gandhi bhavan in the university has over 40,000 books and the other library, also a heritage building on the ridge has 7,000.
other institutes of higher education and research located in shimla are the central potato research institute, a member of indian council of agricultural research (icar) and the national academy of audit and accounts for the training of officers of the indian audits and accounts service (ia&as).
