shimla
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
employment is largely driven by the government and tourism sectors. education sector and horticultural produce processing comprise most of the remainder. recently a model career centre has been set-up at regional employment exchange, shimla to enable bridging the gap between job-seekers and employers.
in addition to being the local hub of transport and trade, shimla is the area's healthcare centre, hosting a medical college and four major hospitals: indira gandhi hospital (snowdown hospital,) deen dayal upadhyay hospital (formerly called ripon hospital), kamla nehru hospital and indus hospital. the city's development plan aims to make shimla an attractive health tourism spot. major departmental headquarters of the state are also located in shimla such as himachal pradesh government printing and stationery press, himachal pradesh state electricity board, and himachal pradesh police headquarters.
the hotel industry is one of the major sources of income generation for the city. shimla has up to 6500 hotels, including 5-star hotels, most popular is oberoi cecil, peterhoff, wildflower hall and hotel holiday home. shimla leads the list of indian cities with the highest-ranked hotels.
national academy of audits and accounts, yarrows
along with schools of higher education, several institutes are also present, namely himachal pradesh university and indian institute of advanced study. recruitment to the iaas is through the joint competitive examinations (the civil services examination) and promotion from the subordinate cadre. once recruited to iaas, the directly recruited officers are trained mainly at the national academy of audit and accounts, shimla. students from across india prefer to study in shimla because of its climate and queen of hill stations status. these have added to the economy of the district as well as the state.
the government is trying to promote the technology and it sector as the new area for growth and promotion although not many companies have yet settled in shimla. there are many new startups in and around shimla. there are over six call centres in shimla.
