shimla
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]
shimla is on the south-western ranges of the himalayas at  wikiminiatlas31°37′n 77°06′e﻿ / ﻿31.61°n 77.10°e﻿ / 31.61; 77.10. it has an average altitude of 2,206 metres (7,238 ft) above mean sea level and extends along a ridge with seven spurs. the city stretches nearly 9.2 kilometres (5.7 mi) from east to west.
simla and jutogh, 1911 map
the city is a zone iv (high damage risk zone) per the earthquake hazard zoning of india. weak construction techniques and an increasing population pose a serious threat to the already earthquake prone region. there are no water bodies near the main city and the closest river, the sutlej, is about 21 km (13 mi) away. other rivers that flow through the shimla district, although further from the city, are the giri, and pabbar (both tributaries of yamuna).
the green belt in the shimla planning area is spread over 414 hectares (1,020 acres). the main forests in and around the city are of pine, deodar, oak and rhododendron. environmental degradation due to the increasing number of tourists every year without the infrastructure to support them has resulted in shimla losing its popular appeal as an ecotourism spot. another rising concern in the region are the frequent number of landslides that often take place after heavy rains.
the city is situated 88 km (55 miles) northeast of kalka, 116 km (72 miles) northeast of chandigarh, 247 km (154 miles) south of manali and 350 km (219 miles) northeast of delhi, the national capital. kalka can be reached within 2.5 hours, and chandigarh can be reached in 3 hours and 15 minutes. delhi and manali are both around 7 hours away from shimla.
to the east of shimla stand the choor mountains (chuor, 3647m). a passage over these mountains, from the tons river to shimla is described in views in india, chiefly among the himalaya mountains, by george francis white with accompanying drawings, village of khandoo, on the ascent to the choor, and two that were subsequently the subject of poetical illustrations by letitia elizabeth landon, namely crossing the choor mountains, and village of koghera and deodar forest, near the choor
the accompanying notes record that "during a considerable part of the year, the choor is hoary with snow; and when moonlight falls upon the scene, an effect is produced as if floods of molten silver were poured over the surface. moonlight in these regions assumes a novel charm."
wikisource has original text related to this article: village of khandoo, on the ascent to the choor

wikisource has original text related to this article: 'village of koghera'a poetical illustration byl. e. l.

wikisource has original text related to this article: 'crossing the choor mountains'a poetical illustration byl. e. l.
seven hills of shimla[edit]

main article: seven hills of shimla
shimla was built on top of seven hills: inverarm hill, observatory hill, prospect hill, summer hill, bantony hill, elysium hill and jakhu hill. the highest point in shimla is the jakhu hill, which is at a height of 2,454 metres (8,051 ft). in recent times the city has spread past the initial seven hills.
