silchar
History[edit]
history[edit]
medieval history[edit]
since silchar was only founded after the introduction of the british in 1832, the pre-colonial history of silchar can be approximated through the history of the region and nearby areas.
tippera, koch, and dimasa rule[edit]
cachar district, whose headquarters is in silchar, was ruled by the tippera dynasty in the 13th century. the initial capital of the kingdom was in khalangsha in cachar, which has been identified as rajghat village in sonai, 18 km from silchar. the tippera eventually moved eastwards to present day tripura. by the 16th century, cachar was a part of the tripura kingdom.
the tippera kings continued their rule in barak valley till mid-16th century, when commander chilarai of the koch dynasty defeated the king of tripura in 1562 in longai. longai became the boundary between the tripura and koch kingdoms. bir chilarai, also known as shukladhwaja, was the younger brother of the koch king naranarayan. gosai kamal, also known as kamal narayan, was another brother of naranarayan. he was made the governor of barak valley and ruled the area from khaspur, 20 km away from silchar.
even after the collapse of the koch kingdom elsewhere, the koch continued ruling cachar from khaspur. the area was ruled by seven more koch kings after gosai kamal: udita singha, dhir singha, mehendra singha, ranjit singha, nara singha and bhim singha.  bhim singha, the last koch raja of khaspur, only had a daughter called kanchani who was married off to prince laksmichandra of the kachari dimasa kingdom of maibang in 1745.  maibang is in present-day hill district of dima hasao, adjacent to cachar. laksmichandra was made the governor of a part of the kingdom which is still named after him - lakhipur, situated 25 km away from silchar. laksmichandra became the raja after bhim singha's death and eventually the two kingdoms were merged and present day cachar came under dimasa rule. under the dimasa kings, cachar witnessed attacks from the mughals, the jaintias, the manipuri kings, the burmese, and the ahoms.
bengali presence in the kachari kingdom[edit]
while the hill areas of the kachari kingdom i.e. dima hasao, had a dimasa stronghold, the plain areas i.e. present day cachar had bengalis constituting the majority. while bengalis had been inhabiting cachar before the koch rule, the dimasa kings encouraged increased migration of bengalis from nearby areas as priests, cultivators, and ministers at court. eventually, the formal conversion of dimasa kings into hinduism was carried out under bengali brahmins when raja krishna chandra and raja govinda chandra performed the hiranyagarbha ceremony in 1790.
the kings in turn were great patrons of bengali literature; bengali was the court language of the kachari kings, translation of sanskrit texts into bengali was carried out, and the kings themselves composed prose and poetry in bengali. in fact some of the only surviving written examples of the bengali tradition in later 18th and early 19th century cachar are the 27 letters written by raja krishna chandra and raja gobinda chandra to the east india company.
colonial history[edit]
burmese invasion and the treaty of badarpur[edit]
after taking over parts of the brahmaputra valley and manipur by 1823, the burmese made forays into cachar as well. the then governor general of india, lord william amherst, saw the british occupation of cachar as essential towards guarding the nearby british held district of sylhet from the burmese. on 6 march 1824, gobinda chandra signed the treaty of badarpur with the british, who declared cachar as a british protectorate and recognised raja gobinda chandra as the ruler of cachar.
the burmese army attacked cachar in 1824 and the british declared war on them. eventually, the two armies clashed in the burmese stronghold of dudpatil, 15 km from silchar and the british were able to drive the burmese away to manipur in 1825. the clash in cachar was the start of the first anglo-burmese war, which ended with the treaty of yandabo, wherein the kingdom of ava agreed to stop attacking cachar, amongst other areas. gobinda chandra was reinstated on the throne but had to pay an annual tribute of rs.10,000 to the british as per the treaty of badarpur, which adversely affected the post-burmese occupation cachar's economy.
gobinda chandra was assassinated without any heir on 24 april 1830. though gambhir singh of manipur, who was suspected to be behind the assassination, laid claim on cachar, it passed onto british hands as per the treaty of badarpur. captain thomas fisher, an army officer took charge of cachar on 30 june 1830 with the headquarters in cherrapunji. on 14 august 1832 cachar came under formal british occupation and in 1833 silchar was made the headquarters. cachar was part of the bengal province from 1832 to 1874, when the district was transferred to the new assam province.
foundation of silchar[edit]
there is no mention of any place called 'silchar' before the annexation of cachar. its constituent areas such as tarapur, ambikapur, kanakpur, and rangpur have been mentioned as villages under gobinda chandra, but not 'silchar'. the earliest mention of silchar was in 1835 in a report by r.b. pamberton, and since then it was mentioned in british official documents. silchar was founded as the administrative headquarters of cachar around the janiganj-sadarghat area of the town. after shifting the district headquarters to silchar in 1832, captain fisher started building sadar station in janiganj. janiganj existed prior to the british as part of a taluk under the mirasdars of ambikapur before being taken over by gobinda chandra. in this respect, captain thomas fisher was the founder of silchar. the sadar station and the district court are still located in and around present day janiganj.
according to a theorist, fisher's reasons for choosing silchar as the administrative centre for cachar included 'the strategic location of silchar, its accessibility from sylhet, availability of land and labour, approach routes to neighbouring hills and prospects of riverine commerce'. the establishment of the sadar station was followed by the construction of the treasury and a kutchery. a jail and a police outpost for the sylhet light infantry was constructed in fatak bazar, while offices and residential quarters were made in janiganj. parts of janiganj were also allotted to officers and traders.
john edgars, the successor to captain fisher, added to the urban growth of the city. he prepared a blueprint for the planned development of silchar, paved the roads, and supervised the construction of office buildings, residential quarters, circuit house and the deputy commissioner's office. the latter two still survive. under him, the jail was shifted from fatak bazar to its present site, and traders from nearby areas in bengal were encouraged to settle in the town. communication facilities were strengthened with the steamer service between silchar and kolkata in 1850, the establishment of the head post office in 1852, and the introduction of telegraph in 1861. while tarapur, malugram and itkhola were part of the older settled areas, newer localities such as central road, nazirpatty, premtola, tulapatty, and narshingtola emerged.
silchar under the british[edit]
due to the initiatives of captain fisher, a medical centre was established in silchar  in 1835, which became a hospital in 1864. the tea industry in cachar was growing by 1855, which lead to silchar's emergence as a centre of trade and commerce. the town got its first english education institution in 1863 when reverend pyrse started the high grammar school, which later became the government boys higher secondary school. in 1864, a charitable dispensary was set up, which later became the civil hospital. silchar got its very first body for self governance in 1882, when a town committee was established under the bengal municipal act, 1876. keating library, the first library in silchar, was established in 1876 and was renamed to arun chanda granthagar after independence. the earliest newspaper in cachar, called 'silchar', appeared in 1883. in 1891, the town became a municipality and in 1899 the assam-bengal railways reached silchar, providing easier access to the chittagong sea port. silchar was connected to kolkata through steamers as well.
silchar witnessed major flooding in june 1929 because of incessant rains and flooding of river barak. n. g. a. edgley, district and sessions judge of sylhet and cachar, was present in silchar during the floods and supervised the relief activities till 19 june when the commissioner and deputy commissioner returned from shillong and haflong, where they were stranded. buildings in the town sustained major damages and the supply of filtered water was absent from 12 june to 5 july.
by 1934, silchar town had grown because of good connectivity through road, river, and rail.  the population in the town had grown by 60% since 1901 and had access to water supply. the town now had increased amenities, including 'presses, motor woks, druggist shop, oil mills, ice factory'. this led to the increase in revenue rates in 1934 by the then deputy commissioner p.c. chatterjee. 1935 saw the establishment of g.c. college as the guardian college. in 1937, the cachar branch of the kishan sabha was established with dwijen sen as first general secretary. in 1940, a conference of the sabha was organised in silchar to demand better conditions for farmers. the tebhaga movement of bengal was organised in cachar district as well by the sabha where the local peasants participated. in 1942, the japanese forces dropped a bomb on derby tea estate 20 km from the town and the second world war led to the shortage of water, electricity, paper, wood, kerosene. and clothes. cycle rickshaws were introduced in silchar the same year.
silchar polo club[edit]
in the 1850s, the british observed exiled manipuri princes in silchar play sagol kangjei, the predecessor to modern polo which was already popular in nearby manipur. captain robert stewart, then assistant deputy commissioner, participated in the game with the manipuri players. in 1859, stewart, now the deputy commissioner, and major general joseph sherer, assistant deputy commissioner, established the world's first polo club in silchar, called the silchar kangjei club. it was later renamed to silchar polo club and survives today as the cachar club, though no polo is played anymore. the first competitive modern form of polo was played in silchar as well, and the plaque for this feat still stands behind the local district library.
post independence history[edit]
after the partition of assam and independence of india, the town of silchar saw a large increase of 10.5% in its population in the decade of 1941–51. this was largely because of the in migration of hindu refugees from the adjacent district of sylhet went to east pakistan. the effect of the partition was felt administratively as well. the sessions court of sylhet had a circuit court present in silchar till independence. after that, silchar and the rest of cachar came under the district & sessions judge, jorhat till 1955 when the district & sessions judge of cachar district took over in silchar. s. k. dutta became the first district & sessions judge of cachar district judiciary.
apart from the refugees from east pakistan, silchar also saw a lot of migration from neighbouring states in northeast due to political disturbances which added to the population growth. the 1971 bangladesh liberation war saw more in migration from then east pakistan.
language movement in barak valley[edit]
main article: bengali language movement (barak valley)
silchar railway station is popularly known as bhasa shahid station.
silchar saw one of the uprisings in favor of the bengali language. when the assam government, under chief minister bimala prasad chaliha, passed a circular to make assamese mandatory, bengalis of barak valley protested. on 19 may 1961, assam police opened fire on unarmed protesters at silchar railway station. eleven people (listed below) were killed.
kanailal niyogi chandicharan sutradhar hitesh biswas satyendra deb kumud ranjan das sunil sarkar tarani debnath sachindra chandra pal birendra sutradhar sukamal purakayastha kamala bhattacharya
after the popular revolt, the assam government had to withdraw the circular and bengali was ultimately given official status in the three districts of barak valley. section 5 of assam act xviii, 1961, safeguards the use of bengali in the cachar district. it says, “without prejudice to the provisions contained in section 3, the bengali language shall be used for administrative and other official purposes up to and including district level.”
world's first all-women crew flight[edit]
in 1985, air india created history by operating the world's first all-women crew flight in the kolkata-silchar route. it was a fokker friendship f-27 flight which was piloted by saudamini deshmukh and co-piloted by nivedita bhasin, and had two airhostesses.
