siliguri
Sports facilities[edit]
sports facilities[edit]
siliguri hosts numerous sporting events and matches to influence and build up young athletes from the city.  some of the important sports enthusiast local clubs in siliguri organise several cricket, football, volleyball, swimming competition, tt matches etc.  s.a.i or sports authority of india in kanchenjunga stadium conducts football and athletics. with the provision for an international outdoor and indoor stadium, siliguri has enough opportunities to host national level matches. this has also led to siliguri being a prominent city to produce national champions like mantu ghosh, the gold medalist winner in the bi-annual south asian games (saf) for table tennis, ankita das, nandita saha and soumyajit ghosh another internationally acclaimed table tennis player and wriddhiman saha – indian international cricketer who plays test matches for indian national team. siliguri has done a tremendous job for indian table tennis. bikash ghosh memorial swimming pool is beside kanchanjunga stadium in the city, which conducts swimming competitions. white water rafting is done nearby in the teesta river.

u-19 football tournament at kanchenjunga stadium, siligurimunicipal corporation indoor stadium
kanchenjunga stadium[edit]
this is the main stadium in siliguri, a multipurpose stadium, mainly used for football matches, although it has also hosted several cricket matches. it has a capacity of 30,000 people at a time. recently this stadium is all set to get a facelift.
football:
this stadium hosted the federation cup 2012 matches of india. the first federation cup played on this ground was between mohun bagan ac and churchill brothers s.c. in 2012. the final match of the 2013–14 santosh trophy was played at the stadium in march 2014. seven rounds of the 2015 i-league 2nd division match were played on this ground. it also hosted two kolkata derby matches in 2016 i-league. all the matches of 2016 saff women's championship were played in the kanchenjunga stadium. third i-league derby matches were held in this stadium ground in 2017.
cricket:
this stadium has hosted 11 ranji trophy matches. the first ranji trophy played on this ground was between bengal and punjab in 2010. two celebrity cricket league matches were played here. the first celebrity cricket league played on this ground was between the veer marathi vs karnataka bulldozers and telugu warriors vs bengal tigers in 2013.
municipal corporation indoor stadium[edit]
indoor sports including table tennis, badminton, taekwon-do, lawn tennis and chess are being played here. siliguri is renowned for being the training grounds of table tennis players. this stadium can hold 5000 people at a time. the senior national table tennis championship was recently organised here. sports festival, 2017 was also held in this indoor stadium.
