siliguri
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road[edit]
nh 27 crosses through the heart of the city which is now a part of ah2 project. siliguri originates the century-old hill cart road that is nh 110 which connects siliguri and darjeeling (77 km) made in british period. siliguri also originates nh 10 which connects gangtok, nh 12 which connects pankhabari-mirik. the highways nh 327, that connects siliguri — panitanki and nh 327b connecting panitanki - mechi bridg, are also part of ah2. it connects to adjacent countries through following routes:
nepal: via panitanki bangladesh: via phulbari china: via nathula, sikkim bhutan: via jaigaon
bus service[edit]
tenzing norgay bus terminus
tenzing norgay  bus terminus: tenzing norgay bus terminus is the main bus terminus serves as bus depot for both government and private bus service which operated by nbstc. it connects to cities in sikkim, assam, bihar, jharkhand, meghalaya etc. and all other districts and cities in west bengal like darjeeling, kalimpong, jalpaiguri, cooch behar, malda, balurghat, raiganj, dalkhola, berhampore, kolkata, asansol, suri etc. sikkim nationalised transport bus terminus: sikkim nationalised transport bus terminus (siliguri) is located at hillcart road in siliguri. this bus terminus is operated by sikkim government. mainly buses connecting towns and cities of sikkim are operated from here. this bus terminus is one of the busy and important bus terminus in siliguri area. sikkim nationalised transport bus terminus (siliguri), which connects sikkim. p. c. mittal memorial bus terminus: p.c. mittal memorial bus terminus is a bus terminal located on sevoke road, siliguri, district darjeeling. both state owned north bengal state transport corporation (nbstc) buses and private buses towards dooars areas ply from here.
rail[edit]
being a transportation hub, siliguri is well connected through railway with almost all parts of the country. there are seven stations that serve the city.
new jalpaiguri junction railway station
new jalpaiguri junction railway station new jalpaiguri junction railway station established in 1960 (station code njp) is an a1 category broad gauge and narrow gauge railway station under katihar railway division of northeast frontier railway zone. it is the biggest railway station of northeast india which serves the city siliguri. this station is well connected to almost all parts of the country except goa. also this station ranked 10th cleanest railway station in india in 2016 survey and came among the top 100 booking stations of indian railway. there are many services available including 1 international mitali express, 4 rajdhani express, 2 tourist vistadome express, 1 shatabdi express and 2 humsafar express.
siliguri junction railway station
siliguri junction siliguri junction railway station (station code sguj) established in 1949 is another major broad gauge and narrow gauge railway station of siliguri. until 2011 it was the only triple gauge (broad gauge, meter gauge and narrow gauge) railway station in india. after 2011 meter gauge was shut down but the track is still present between siliguri junction railway station and bagdogra railway station. there are many services available, towards different cities of india.
siliguri town railway station siliguri town railway station is one of the oldest railway station (station code sgut) of the region opened in 1880, 139 years ago for darjeeling himalayan railway (toy train) which were connecting siliguri and darjeeling. it lost its importance due to newly made siliguri junction railway station and new jalpaiguri junction. siliguri town railway station is also a broad gauge and narrow gauge railway station which is halting point for 8 trains only.
bagdogra railway station bagdogra railway station (station code bora) comes under greater siliguri metropolitan area. it is 10 km from siliguri junction and 3rd largest railway station after njp and siliguri junction. this station serves bagdogra and adjacent areas. bagdogra railway station is on siliguri-aluabari broad gauge single line via thakurganj. this station is halting point for 14 trains.
gulma railway station gulma railway station railway (station code glma) comes under siliguri urban area. it is 12 km from siliguri city center and serves champasari anchal, gulma areas. gulma railway station is on new jalpaiguri-alipurduar-samuktala road line. this station is halting point of 5 trains. mainly passenger train are halt in this station.
matigara railway station matigara railway station (station code mtra) is situated at mathapari, west bengal. trains passing through this station include mlfc - sguj demu and sguj- mlfc demu. this station has a single platform and two tracks. one broad gauge line and one metre gauge line.
rangapani railway station rangapani railway station (station code rni) comes under greater siliguri metropolitan area. it is 14 km from siliguri city center and serves rangapani and adjacent areas. rangapani railway station is on howrah-new jalpaiguri line. this station is halting point for 2 passenger trains.
air[edit]
aircraft at bagdogra international airport
bagdogra international airport is an international airport located towards the west of siliguri city, operated as a civil enclave at afs bagdogra of the indian air force. this airport is a major transport hub in the region with flights connecting kolkata, new delhi, mumbai, chennai, bangalore, hyderabad, ahmedabad, guwahati, dibrugarh and has international connectivity with paro and bangkok. the airport also has regular helicopter services to gangtok. due to its location near darjeeling hills and sikkim, bagdogra international airport sees thousands of tourists annually.
central government of india confirmed international airport status to this airport in 2002 with limited international operations. this is one of the few airports in india with zero sales tax on aviation turbine fuel.
