siliguri
Media[edit]
media[edit]
newspaper english newspapers including the telegraph, times of india, the statesman, the economic times, and the asian age are widely circulated throughout the city. several bengali newspapers including uttarbanga sambad, anandabazar patrika, bartaman, uttarer saradin, aajkaal, pratidin, and ganashakti and nepali paper himalaya darpan   are available. the leading hindi dailies prabhat khabar and janpath samachar are also published from siliguri.the online based news portals siliguri times, khabar arohan, bong siliguri times, ccn news, the siliguri journal, and siliguri barta, times of north provide live updates regarding siliguri and adjacent areas.
radio all india radio siliguri was commissioned in 1963 as an additional station of air kolkata. it has two groups of transmitters, i.e. high power bel hmb 140 (am) -2 [2×100 kw] and medium range gcel 136 (fm) - 2 [2×5 kw], for broadcasting programs. prantik was the first program broadcast from here in 1969. in the course of time many notable individuals like hemanta mukhopadhyay, ustad rashid khan, subhas mukhopadhyay, shashi kapoor, manabendra mukhopadhyay, madhuri chattopadhyay, and priya ranjan dasmunshi have visited air siliguri. popular programs executing from here are pratyusha, yuva anusthan, grame ganje, mahila majlis, mananiyeshu, sishumahal and arogya. two radio channels are operated from air siliguri through which programs are broadcasting daily:
no.  name  frequency  language   01 primary channel (pc) pc: 421.9 metres 711 khz (medium wave) bengali   02 vividh bharati service (vbs) vbs: 101.4 mhz (high wave) bengali/hindi
in addition to all india radio, siliguri has several private fm radio channels:
no.  name  frequency  language   01 nine fm 91.9 fm hindi   02 radio high 92.7 fm hindi   03 red fm 93.5 fm hindi   04 radio misty 94.3 fm bengali   05 radio mirchi 98.3 fm bengali   06 air rainbow 102.3 fm hindi/english
television siliguri receives almost all television channels that are received by rest of the country. apart from the national terrestrial network doordarshan, cable tv serves most of the houses. siliguri also receives some nepali and bangladeshi channels too. siliguri has three local channels: ccn, amar cable and htv. there is a tv tower in kurseong, about 25 km from siliguri.
