siliguri
Flora and fauna[edit]
flora and fauna[edit]
flora[edit]
orchid
sukna forest, siliguri
siliguri and surrounding sub-himalayan forests are rich in fauna diversity, the plains of north bengal (siliguri, jalpaiguri, cooch behar etc.) are surrounded by deep forests. these forests are home of various rare and common species of plants. the forest here is moist tropical and characterised by dense growth of tall sal i.e. shorea robusta. sal occupies about 80% of all vegetation in these tropical forest.
these forests are categorised by their dominating plant species such as 1) east himalayan sal forest present on the lower slopes of mahananda wildlife sanctuary contains sal, khair, simul, sissoo, riverine grasslands and various rare species of plants like orchids 2) east himalayan upper bhabar sal mainly present at jalpaiguri district which is characterised by dense population of microstegium chiliatum, sal i.e. shorea robusta. others are terminalia tomentosa, schima wallichii and the 3) eastern tarai sal forest generally found in lower altitudes compared to other two types of forest. this type of forest characterised by various species of bamboos, ferns, and sal which is found in baikunthapur forest, near siliguri city.
rapid growth of city causing deforestation, making siliguri warmer day by day and unbalancing the ecosystem.
fauna[edit]
wild indian elephant at mahananda wildlife sanctuary
siliguri is located in the terai region ("moist land"), a belt of marshy grasslands and dense tropical deciduous moist forests at the base of himalaya range which is rich in biodiversity, containing numerous rare species of flora and fauna. these forests are characterised by their distinct wildlife variety. mahananda wildlife sanctuary near siliguri is famous for elephants. sukna is the gateway to this sanctuary, which is 12 km from siliguri.
these sub-himalayan forests are the home of various types of wild animals like the elephant, tiger, indian bison, barking deer, wild pig, monkey, civet, snake, lizard, mountain goat, sambar, chital and fishing cat. these forests are also home of about 243 different bird species like the pied hornbill, egret, kingfisher, drongo, fly catcher, woodpecker and others. another common sight is migratory water birds.
