siliguri
Governance and politics[edit]
governance and politics[edit]
civic administration[edit]
siliguri saw rapid urbanisation under the british rule and that was reflected in its local governance as well. the earliest form of local urban governance as a sanitation committee set up in 1915.  its function was to dispose off night soil. till 1921, most aspects of local governance in darjeeling district, including siliguri, was looked after by the darjeeling improvement fund. in 1922,  siliguri local board with nominated members was created under the bengal local self government act, 1885. in 1938, the union board was set up in siliguri under the bengal village self-government act, 1919 and it provided public utilities in the city.
the municipal council was set up in 1949 under the bengal municipal act of 1932 with 8 wards. the first chairperson of the municipality was the sub divisional officer and the local councilors, called 'commissioners' in the then municipal act in effect, were nominated by the state government. after the amendment of the act in 1956, 3/4 of the local representatives were elected, while the remaining nominated by the deputy commissioner. thus, the first elected chairperson of siliguri was jagdish chandra bhattacharya.
in 1994, the municipal council was upgraded to the siliguri municipal corporation with 47 wards. it had five departments then: general administration, collection, license, public works and sanitation and public health. the corporation now has 23 departments. it has 47 wards, of which 14 wards are in jalpaiguri district, while the remaining 33 wards are in darjeeling district. the last municipal elections was in 2015, when communist party of india (marxist) won 23 seats, all india trinamool congress won 17 seats, indian national congress won 5 seats, bharatiya janata party won 2 seats, while an independent candidate won 1 seat. the mayor of siliguri for the 5-year term of 2015-20 was ashok bhattacharya from cpim, who was later elected as the local member of legislative assembly as well.
the term of the last elected body of siliguri municipal corporation got over on 7 may, but municipal elections could not be held because of the covid-19 pandemic. a board of administrators was established with the outgoing mayor, ashok bhattacharya, as the chairperson. this board will take care of the civic utilities of the city till the new municipal body is elected. this follows the establishment of similar boards first in state capital kolkata and then the rest of the state.
lok sabha and vidhan sabha constituency[edit]
siliguri is part of the darjeeling lok sabha constituency. the last elections for the lok sabha took place in 2019, when raju bista from bharatiya janta party won the seat. the last elections to the west bengal vidhan sabha took place in 2021. the member of legislative assembly representing siliguri vidhan sabha constituency is sankar ghosh.
civic services and infrastructure[edit]
building plans in siliguri are approved by siliguri municipal corporation; for building up to 3 storeys including parking, the borough offices give clearance, while for buildings with more than 3 storeys, the building department gives the approval.  the present city development plan 2041 for siliguri was developed in 2015 as part of the capacity building for urban development project under the then ministry of urban development by the private consultancy, crisil risk and infrastructure solutions limited.  siliguri city comes under siliguri jalpaiguri planning area and the responsibility of planning and development of the city lies with siliguri jalpaiguri development authority.
the public health engineering department of the state government is responsible for developing and maintaining the infrastructure for water supply, while the water supply department of the corporation provides new connections, supplies water, and collects the user charges. the conservancy environment department of the corporation provides solid waste management services in the city. each ward in the city has its own solid waste management committee that takes care of cleanliness at the ward level. the public works department of the corporation and siliguri jalpaiguri development authority are both responsible for the construction and maintenance of roads in siliguri. siliguri jalpaiguri development authority also prepared the traffic & transportation master plan 2030 and the comprehensive mobility plan for siliguri jalpaiguri planning area.
