siliguri
Visitors' attractions[edit]
visitors' attractions[edit]

coronation bridge on teestaheritage toy train at njpbengal safari parkgajoldoba view point
darjeeling himalayan railway toy train runs between new jalpaiguri, siliguri and darjeeling. it was built between 1879 and 1881 and has been designated as a unesco world heritage site. coronation bridge, also known as sevoke bridge, is situated on lower himalaya about 20 km from siliguri and was made in 1930 this bridge spans across teesta river. gajoldoba view point is 28 km from siliguri, famous for the huge reservoir formed by teesta barrage. this reservoir is home for variety of migratory birds (like river lapwing, great crested grebe, indian cormorant, purple heron, eurasian wigeon, common shelduck, cotton teal, tufted duck, little ringed plover, great cormorant). due to shuttling of migratory birds, the pakhibitan sanctuary was established here. a boating facility is available.
north bengal wild animals park, about 8 km (5.0 mi) away from the city, offers visitors the 'bengal safari' to experience sub-himalayan wildlife closely, such as jungle fowl, sambar deer, royal bengal tiger, wild boars, spotted deer, wild bear, and rhinoceros. it is fundamentally a part of the mahananda wildlife sanctuary, spread over an area of 700 acres. the park conducts herbivore safaris, carnivore safaris, and elephant safaris. the mahananda wildlife sanctuary is located 13 km (8.1 mi) away from siliguri on the foothills of the himalayas, between teesta and mahananda.the sanctuary spans over 159 km (61 sq mi) of reserve forest. in 1959, it received the status of a sanctuary mainly to protect the indian bison and royal bengal tiger. this sanctuary is home to rare mountain goat, chital, barking dear, fishing cat, sambar deer, tiger, elephant and indian bison and migratory birds. it offers mild to medium trekking challenges at some points.
there are some important hindu and buddhists monuments in and around the city. salugara monastrey is located 6 km (3.7 mi) away from siliguri. main attraction is the 100 ft (30 m) stupa, which is believed to be founded by the tibetan lama, kalu rinpoche. the ideal tranquil location for meditation was established by tibetan monks and followers of dalai lama. sed-gyued monastery is located near salugara monastery. it is a breathtaking monument which was destroyed by the chinese army, and then rebuilt. the monastery is home to more than 90 monks of the gelukpa division, and is used as a research centre. ewam india buddhist monastrey is 11 km (6.8 mi) from siliguri and is placed in the lap of nature near bengal safari. the iskcon temple in the city, also known as sri sri radha madhav sundar mandir locally, is one of the biggest krishna centres in the north-eastern region of india. the sevoke kali temple is an ancient temple on the banks of teesta river close to the coronation bridge.this temple dedicated to maa kali, the goddess of destruction.
siliguri also offers amusement and water parks to tourists and locals. dreamland amusemet park, located near fulbari, 12 km (7.5 mi) from siliguri junction, is an agricultural land converted in a fun house. it has 5-6 usual rides with a mini ropeway also. savin kingdom is an amusement and water park which is located near dagapur in siliguri. the water park has a pool, slides, artificial wave, and rain dance. it also has various joy rides like adrenaline junkies, sky train, break dance, go-carting, and artificial bulls. a multiplex, kids zone, restaurant are also there.
north bengal science centre, established in 1997, is the only science sentre of north bengal. the main attractions are digital planetarium, science shows, 3d theater, taramandal shows, science galleries and a green science park. the hong kong market is known as the chandni chowk of northeast india, a street market with a variety of shops popping out on the alleyways.
