solapur
Etymology and history[edit]
etymology and history[edit]
shri siddheshwar temple during the makar sankranti (solapur)
the solapur (anciently called sonnalage) district was ruled by various dynasties such as andhrabhratyas, chalukyas, rashtrakutas, yadavas and bahamanis. 'solapur' spelled in (marathi: सोलापूर is believed to be derived from the combination of two words: sola / सोला in hindi means "sixteen" and "pura / पुर" means "village".
the present city of solapur was considered to be spread over sixteen villages viz. aadilpur, ahmedpur, chapaldev, fatehpur, jamdarwadi, kalajapur, khadarpur, khandervkiwadi, muhammadpur, ranapur, sandalpur, shaikpur, solapur, sonallagi, sonapur and vaidakwadi and all these villages are now merged with solapur municipal corporation.
it is evident from the inscriptions of shivayogi lord siddheshwar of the time of the kalachuristis of kalyani, that the town was called 'sonnalage', an old kannada name, which came to be pronounced as 'sonnalagi'. the town was known as sonnalagi even up to the times of yadavas. a sanskrit inscription dated (sanskrit:शके १२३८) śakē 1238, after the downfall of the yadavas found at kamati in mohol shows that the town was known as sonalipur.
one of the inscriptions found in solapur fort shows that the town was called sonalpur while another inscription on the well in the fort shows that it was known as sandalpur. subsequently, the british rulers pronounced solapur as sholapur and hence the name of the district. the present solapur district was previously part of ahmednagar, pune and satara districts. in 1838 it became the sub-district of ahmednagar. it included barshi, mohol, madha, karmala, indi, hippargi and muddebihal sub-divisions. in 1864 this sub-district was abolished. in 1871 this district was reformed joining the sub-divisions viz. solapur, barshi, mohol, madha and karmala and two subdivisions of satara district viz. pandharpur, sangola and in 1875 malshiras sub-division was also attached. after the state reorganisation in 1956 solapur was included in bombay state and it became a full-fledged district of maharashtra state in 1960.
the municipal corporation building was built by rao saheb mallappa warad. he was also one of the first to bring the farming tractor to india. it was his wish that the building should be used for some public purpose and thus the building was made the municipal council. the building is also called indra bhawan which means 'abode of indra' (lord indra). mallappa warad was also one of the ten members of 'chamber of merchants' under queen victoria.
the solapur municipal council was the first municipal council to hoist the indian national flag on the municipal council building in 1930. taking the spirit of dandi march from mahatma gandhi, the freedom fighters of solapur hoisted the national flag on 6 april 1930 on the municipal council building. this was the first and the unique incidence of such kind throughout the country.
during the indian independence movement, the people of solapur enjoyed full freedom on 9–11 may 1930. however, this resulted in the executions of mallappa dhanshetti, abdul rasool qurban hussein, jagannath bhagwan shinde and shrikisan laxminarayan sarada, who were hanged by the british government on 12 january 1931, in the prison at pune. this resulted in the city becoming recognized as "the city of hutatmas" literally "the city of martyrs".
tehsils of solapur district. the north and south tehsils forms the city
the padmashalis are the one of the largest community in solapur. the rise of moghul rule and there after britishers who came to india for doing cloth business has lot of impact on weaving technology. the cloth manufactured at brimingham, england can sell at cheaper rate in india and the qualities of their cloth were much better than our hand woven cloths on gunta maggam (pit-loom). since there is no buyer for our hand woven cloths, the domestic textile industry suffered losses. the britisher established east india company at calcutta and spread their business across the india. they have also ruled our country till 1947. the impact of cloth business compelled padmashalis to move to different places in india. maharashtra is adjacent to telangana, andhra pradesh; most of them started moving in search of their livelihood. earlier days there were no transportation available; people started walking from telangana and stayed for days together wherever in the en route to mumbai. in this course some of them even settled in most parts of maharashtra like nanded, jalna, aurangabad, and nasik, ahmednagar, solapur, pune and even interior parts of the villages. their basic occupation was weaving; hence most of them have chosen weaving job in cotton mills. gradually the strength has increased and it can be witnessed that about 400 to 500 padmashalis could be seen in each mill in mumbai. most of the people in solapur are started there textile.
there is also one of the oldest ganesh temples, ajoba ganpati temple, which started celebrating the ganesh festival in 1885.
