solapur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
rail[edit]
main entrance of solapur railway station
solapur railway station is the main railway hub within the city. the solapur railway division is an important division connecting south india to western & north west india. trains from ahmedabad, jaipur, new delhi, mumbai, pune etc., ply to southern states (telangana, karnataka, tamil nadu & kerala) via solapur.government has decided to make solapur railway station as the high tech station in maharashta.
hotgi junction and kurduvadi junction are two junction railway stations present in the solapur district.
12115 siddeshwar express ac coach
road[edit]
solapur internal city transport is managed by smt (solapur municipal transport), but the buses operated by smc are limited to less than 100 buses.
solapur is well connected by road with major cities of maharashtra as well as the adjoining state capital of hyderabad and important cities in karnataka by four national highways – nh 9 highway connecting pune with vijaywada via hyderabad but the solapur-omerga stretch of nh65 is a bit uncomfortable as the quality of roads still remains below par/under construction, suryapet, nh-52 connecting solapur to kaithal, mangalore, karnataka and nh-211 connecting solapur to dhule. ratnagiri-nagpur national highway nh-204 passes through city, connecting solapur to other important cities in maharashtra like nagpur, sangli, kolhapur and nanded. recently sanctioned national highways- (solapur - kalaburagi) and ratnagiri-solapur-nanded-yavatmal-nagpur. (solapur-bijapur) road section in nh-13 is proposed to be improved by its four laning. the solapur-aurangabad national highway project is completed recently and the new four laning has reduced the time and cost in travelling from solapur to aurangabad.
air[edit]
solapur airport (iata code: sse) is located to the south of solapur city. there aren't any scheduled flights operating out of solapur airport. nearest airport is gulbarga airport (90 km). the government of maharashtra has planned to upgrade the airport but no on ground works has been done till now .
