south-dum-dum
Education[edit]
education[edit]

see also: north dumdum § education, and dum dum § education
the following institutions are located in south dum dum:
dr. sudhir chandra sur degree engineering college, established by the jis educational initiatives at dum dum in 2009 offers degree, diploma and post graduate courses in engineering. it is affiliated to makaut  dum dum motijheel college was established in dum dum in 1950. the college runs in two shifts. the women's section has classes in the morning and the coeducational section has classes during the day. both the sections offer various subjects. the college has a post graduate unit in m.sc. mathematics and m.a. english. it offers a vocational course in instrumentation. dum dum motijheel rabindra mahavidyalaya was established at dum dum in 1968.it was started as an evening college in commerce, became a day college in commerce in 1974 and finally a general day college, with arts, science, and commerce courses, in 2004. it offers b.com (hons) in marketing, geography honours in b.sc. and journalism honours in b.a. east calcutta girl's college, lake town ramakrishna sarada mission vivekananda vidyabhavan was established by ramakrishna sarada mission at dum dum in 1961. it is a partly residential college for women. it offers honours courses in bengali, english, sanskrit, education, history, philosophy, political science, sociology, journalism & mass communication, economics and geography. indian college of arts and draftsmanship, was established at dum dum in 1893. it offers courses in painting, applied arts, sculpture and graphics. it is affiliated with rabindra bharati university. dum dum krishna kumar hindu academy, at motijheel avenue, amarpalli, is a boys only bengali-medium higher secondary school. it has arrangements for teaching from classes vi – xii. it was established in 1933. dum dum kishore bharati high school, motijheel avenue, in ward no. 9, south dum dum municipality, is a boys only bengali-medium higher secondary school. it has arrangements for teaching from classes vi – xii. it was established in 1965.> dum dum motijheel girls' high school, at dum dum road, is a girls’ only high school, under wb board, providing higher secondary education. dum dum prachya banimandir for boys and dum dum prachya banimandir for girls at seth bagan. schools are different for both genders and is a higher secondary school. dum dum sri aurabinda vidyamandir in khudiram colony is a co-educational higher secondary school. krishnapur adarsha vidyamandir, at dum dum park, in ward no. 28, is a boys only bengali-medium higher secondary school. it has facilities for teaching in classes vi to xii. it was established in 1954. about 3000 students studies in this school and popular as one of the best school in the state. the school is fully controlled under cctv surveillance. sahid rameswar vidyamandir, jessore road, amarpalli, is a co-educational, higher secondary school. seth bagan adarsha vidyamandir is a co-educational, higher secondary school. christchurch girls' high school, jessore road, is a bengali-medium, girls only school preparing students for madhyamik and higher secondary examination of the west bengal boards. established in 1882, it has arrangements for teaching from infant to class xii. admission for primary section starts around december. it has hostel facilities. st. mary's orphanage & day school, kolkata, was initially set up by christian brothers from ireland at murgighata in calcutta in 1848 and shifted to dum dum road in 1947. it is a boys only institution and prepares students for the icse and isc examinations.
