south-dum-dum
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]
[interactive fullscreen map] cities and towns in the southern portion of barrackpore subdivision in north 24 parganas districtm: municipal city/ town, ct: census town, n: neighbourhood/ administrative locationowing to space constraints in the small map, the actual locations in a larger map may vary slightly
location[edit]
shyamasundari temple, purba sinthee
alcove gloria (apartment complex), lake town
south dum dum is located at  wikiminiatlas22°37′n 88°24′e﻿ / ﻿22.61°n 88.40°e﻿ / 22.61; 88.40.
south dum dum is bounded by north dumdum (municipality) and dum dum (municipality) on the north, baguiati and adjacent areas of vip road on the east, salt lake on the south and belgachia and sinthee in kolkata district and baranagar (municipality) on the west.
south dum dum consists of localities such as nagerbazar, amarpally, motijheel, subhas nagar, bediapara, jheelbagan, jawpore, ghughudanga, purba sinthee, seth bagan, kalindi, lake town, bangur avenue, shyamnagar, satgachhi, patipukur, dakshindari, dum dum park etc.
96% of the population of barrackpore subdivision (partly presented in the map alongside, all places marked on the map are linked in the full screen map) lives in urban areas. in 2011, it had a density of population of 10,967 per km. the subdivision has 16 municipalities and 24 census towns. for most of the cities/towns, information regarding the density of population is available in the infobox. population data is not available for neighbourhoods. it is available for the entire municipal area and thereafter ward-wise.
police station[edit]
dum dum police station under barrackpore police commissionerate has jurisdiction over dum dum and parts of south dum dum municipal areas. lake town police station under bidhannagar police commissionerate also has jurisdiction over parts of south dum dum.
post offices[edit]
south dum dum is a vast locality with many postal index numbers:
motijheel has a delivery sub post office, with pin 700074 in the kolkata north division of kolkata district in calcutta region. other post offices with the same pin are dum dum road and jawpore.
sethbagan has a non-delivery sub post office, with pin 700030 in the kolkata north division of kolkata district in calcutta region. other post offices with the same pin are purba sinthee and ghughudanga.
subhas nagar has a non-delivery sub post office, with pin 700065 in the kolkata north division of kolkata district in calcutta region. other post office with the same pin is health institute. bediapara has a delivery sub post office, with pin 700077 in the kolkata north division of kolkata district in calcutta region.
nagerbazar has a non-delivery sub-post office, with pin 700028 in the kolkata north division of kolkata district in calcutta region. another post office with the same pin is jugipara satgachhi.
bangur avenue has a delivery sub-post office, with pin 700055 in the kolkata east division of north 24 parganas district in calcutta region. other post offices with the same pin are dum dum park and shyamnagar.
lake town has a delivery sub-post office, with pin 700089 in the kolkata east division of north 24 parganas district in calcutta region. another post office with the same pin is kalindi housing estate.
patipukur has a non-delivery sub-post office, with pin 700048 in the kolkata east division of north 24 parganas district in calcutta region. other post offices with the same pin are sreebhumi and sadhana ausudhalaya road (dakshindari).
