sri-muktsar-sahib
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
the contemporary lifestyle of the city is still strongly grounded in the traditional punjabi culture, though the residents have customized the modernization, retaining the elements of their original culture. people often tend to be conservative in thoughts, opinions and clothes as compared to bigger cities. since sri muktsar sahib lacks any major industry interaction or activity, it is largely not impacted by the modern cosmopolitan culture.  the city has a share of troubles as small towns are low on priority list of everyone. however, the traditional punjabi culture in sri muktsar sahib is rich, emphasizing family values and respect for elders. regional as well as national festivals – lohri, holi, gurpurbs and diwali – are celebrated with great fervor. weddings in the city are an elaborate, expensive arrangement, with the rituals extending for days, accompanied with songs, music, dance, traditional dresses and food. traditional dance forms include bhangra and giddha. sri muktsar sahib is well renowned for muktsari kurta pajama and muktsari jutti.
languages and dialect[edit]
punjabi is the main language spoken in the city, and is spoken with a malwai dialect. people also understand hindi, though it is spoken with a punjabi accent. rajasthani is another dialect spoken in the city because of its proximity to the state of rajasthan. since some migrants from other states like uttar pradesh and bihar come to sri muktsar sahib for manual unskilled jobs, the number of hindi speakers has increased. a small segment of the city's population can comprehend english.
cuisine[edit]
wheat, in the form of rotis and parathas, forms the staple food of the city, which is eaten with cooked vegetables or legumes, usually in a spicy curry, using cooking oil. the common vegetables include potato, cauliflower, eggplant, okra and carrot. the popular legumes often cooked in the form of curry are lentil, chickpea, pigeon pea, black gram, peas and beans. rice and dairy products are also an important component of the local food. paneer – milk solids pressed under a weight and cut into cubes – is an expensive dairy food, eaten as curry with peas or other vegetables. the food is often supplemented by dairy products, such as yogurt or clarified butter, chutneys, pickles, papad onion, cucumbers or tomatoes. the local cuisine is well classified into two categories: vegetarian and non-vegetarian. however, meat is expensive, so most people cannot afford to eat meat or fish everyday, and even affluent people eat relatively little meat by western standards. western style breakfast of toast, eggs, or prepared breakfast cereals is gaining popularity in the city compared to traditional punjabi cuisine. the most popular method of cooking is using lpg gas stoves and traditionally, the household cooking is done mostly by women.
the city has many restaurants that serve the local cuisine, chinese food, south indian food, fast food, pizza and ice cream. the prominent local restaurants include chawla's 2, cafe aroma, hot & fresh canadian pizza, baskin-robbins, vadilal and havmor. chai, samosa, golgappa, dahi bhalla, aloo tikki, pakora, chow mein and kulcha are cheap fast-selling items here, that are sold by both unlicensed and licensed food vendors, including mobile vendors, though the hygiene of the food is sometimes questionable. burgers have managed to creep in as a cheap street fare, though it is very different from a typical american burger. sri muktsar sahib does not have any significant presence of a major international food chain store or a fine dining restaurant.
entertainment and performing arts[edit]
entertainment avenues are virtually non-existent in sri muktsar sahib. the city is not exposed to western culture of nightclubs, pubs or clubs. in july 2015, the first multiplex was opened in sri muktsar sahib. with 3 screens and 590 seats, this cinema is being run as a franchise from srs cinemas by rajpal theater. there are other 3 single-screen movie theaters in sri muktsar sahib – cine payal, karnail and ajit. there are no museums or performing arts centers in the city.
parks[edit]
the major park in the city is guru gobind singh park, which has a sidewalk in a circular loop, that can be used for jogging. mai bhago park, located just behind guru gobind singh park, is a war memorial as a reminiscence for the battle of sri muktsar sahib in the memory of mai bhago and 40 muktas. however, the park is ill-maintained. the city has another small park in the mukt-e-minar complex, which houses the world's tallest khanda. it is located along the district administrative complex.
