sri-ganganagar
History[edit]
history[edit]
maharaja ganga singh, with his son in 1914.
sri ganganagar was established by maharaja ganga singh. it was part of bikaner state. sri ganganagar is one of the first well-planned modern cities of india, it is said to be influenced by the town planning of paris. it is divided into residential blocks and a commercial area which includes a dhan mandi (agricultural marketplace).
almost 70-75 percent of people in sri ganganagar depend on farming. they grow a number of crops, including wheat, rice, and sugarcane. these products are exported to many other states, such as punjab and haryana.
the youth of sri ganganagar enjoy sports like kabaddi, cricket, badminton and football. they win hundreds of trophies and cups every year in state and national level tournaments.
it is at the point where the sutlej waters enter rajasthan, and where it entered the erstwhile bikaner state. it is said by the elders that this area first came under the jurisdiction of bahawalpur state. but due to the large open area, the area was unguarded, and hindu mal (a companion of maharaja ganga singh) took advantage of this opportunity and moved the posts along the boundary. he started his journey to change posts from suratgarh in the south, and went until what is now hindumalkot in the north. he informed the maharaja about his successful invasion of the area when he reached the northern part and thereafter died, giving name to the city hindumalkot.
in 1899–1900, the bikaner state was affected by a severe famine. to resolve this issue, maharaja ganga singh obtained the services of awe standley, an engineer, who demonstrated the feasibility of the western area of the bikaner state being irrigated by the waters of the sutlej. the plan of the sutlej valley project was drawn by the chief engineer of punjab, rg kennedy, according to which the vast area of erstwhile bikaner state could be brought under irrigation. however, the project was delayed due to objections by the state of bahawalpur.
with the intervention of the viceroy of india, lord curzon in 1906, a tripartite conference was held and an agreement was reached on 4 september 1920. the foundation stone of the canal head works at ferozepur was laid on 5 december 1925 and the work completed in 1927 by constructing 143 km (89 mi) of lined canal. the opening ceremony was performed on 26 october 1927 by lord irwin, then viceroy of india.
the plan for the city of sri ganganagar was drawn at this time. irrigated parts of bikaner state were brought under sri ganganagar district. part of the district was later split off to form hanumangarh district in 1994.
