sri-muktsar-sahib
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]
sri muktsar sahib is located in the south-western part of the punjab state in north india. the city is spread over an area of 12.66 square miles (32.80 square km). the geographical coordinates of the city are 30° 29' 0" north, and 74° 31' 0" east. nearby cities include bathinda 33 miles (53 km) to the south east, ferozepur 32 miles (52 km) to the north, faridkot 31 miles (50 km ) to the north east and abohar 35 miles (56 km) to the south west. the state capital, chandigarh, lies 249 km (155 miles) east to sri muktsar sahib. the city of ludhiana is 92 miles (148 km) and amritsar lies 104 miles (167 km) away. the indian capital, new delhi, lies 247 miles (398 km) south east to sri muktsar sahib.
topography[edit]
the average land elevation of the city is 648.52 feet (197.67 metres) above sea level. lithologically, sri muktsar sahib is a part of the vast indo-gangetic alluvial plain, composed of alternate bands of sands, silt and clay with pebbles. sandy plains, sand dunes and topographic depressions are the common landforms.
pedology[edit]
the soil of sri muktsar sahib varies from sandy to loam in texture, and is low in organic carbon, phosphorus, zinc and other micro nutrients, but high in potassium. the salt affected soil of sri muktsar sahib has been categorized as sodic soil and saline sodic soil. the villages surrounding the city produce high yields of cotton, wheat, paddy and seed oil.
climate[edit]
climatically, the western himalaya in the north and the thar desert in the south and south-west mainly influence the climatic conditions. since the city lies far away from the sivalik hills, and any of the major rivers, it experiences an extreme climate situation. summers are extremely hot, and winters very cold. the city experiences four distinct seasons – spring (february – march), summer (april – august), fall/autumn (september – october) and winter (november – january), along with the monsoon season setting in towards the later half of the summer. summers, from early april to mid october, are typically very hot and humid, with an average daily june high temperature of 104 °f (40 °c). the season experiences heat indices easily breaking 110 °f (43 °c). winters are very cold and foggy with few sunny days, and with a december daytime average of 37.4 °f (3 °c). the western disturbance brings some rain in winters that further adds to the chill. spring and autumn are mild and pleasant seasons with low humidity. the monsoon season usually starts in the first week of july and continues till august. thunderstorms are not uncommon during the monsoon. the mean annual rainfall fluctuates around 425 mm. about 71 per cent of the annual rainfall in the city is received during the monsoon season.
