sri-muktsar-sahib
Places of interest[edit]
places of interest[edit]
gurudwaras[edit]
gurdwara tibbi sahib, sri muktsar sahib
the main gurudwara in sri muktsar sahib is gurudwara tuti gandi sahib, which was built by the first sikh residents of the city that settled in the city in 1743. the gurudwara has a large holy pool, and the darbar sahib is located on the western bank of the pool. the building has been renovated several times. the holy shrine was built in the memory of the 40 muktas who died fighting for the 10th sikh guru, guru gobind singh ji. tuti gandi, which literally translated means "broken ties", which is referred to guru gobind singh ji nullifying the document that he was no longer the guru of the 40 sikhs, in the context of the battle of sri muktsar sahib. though the gurudwara attracts several visitors a day, there is a massive devotee footfall on mela maghi, celebrated on 13 january every year. the gurudwara also celebrates other religious occasions like the birthdays of guru nanak dev ji, guru gobind singh ji and the martyrdom of guru arjun dev ji and diwali, when the gurudwara is often illuminated. shri kalgidhar niwas with forty rooms is available here for the devotees to stay during their visit. in the same premises, near the southeastern corner of the pool, is gurudwara tambu sahib, which was built by maharaja mohinder singh of patiala. 50 metres away from the sarovar lies the gurudwara shahidganj sahib. built by raja wazir singh of faridkot, it is believed that it was here that guru gobind singh ji cremated the bodies of the martyrs. gurudwara tibbi sahib is also associated with the battle of sri muktsar sahib. it was this strategic spot that the guru chose to get a good view of the area, as that spot was located on a small hill, or a tibbi as called in punjabi
located around 200 meters east of gurudwara tibbi sahib, is the gurudwara rakabsar sahib, where, according to sikh chronicles, the stirrup, or rakab in punjabi, of guru gobind singh ji's horse snapped. another gurudwara associated with guru gobind singh ji in sri muktsar sahib is gurudwara sri datansar sahib, where he killed a muslim enemy, when he was attacked while brushing his teeth with a datan, a traditional indian toothbrush. gurudwara taran taran sahib, located on sri muktsar sahib-bathinda road, is also associated with guru gobind singh ji, where he halted while moving towards rupana, after winning the battle of sri muktsar sahib.
hindu temples[edit]
the city has hindu temples, the prominent ones include durga mandir, shiv mandir on kotkapura road and mahadev mandir.
mosque[edit]
the city has a historical mosque called jamia masjid. also known as angooran wali maseet, it was built in november 1894 by nawab maulvi razav ali mian badruddin shah. it features minarets and domes.
church[edit]
little flower catholic church in adarsh nagar.
jain temple[edit]
digamber jain temple located in rambara bazaar.

mela maghi[edit]
an annual event celebrated in the month of january every year, the mela is organized as a tribute to the 40 sikhs who died fighting for guru gobind singh ji in the battle of sri muktsar sahib in 1705. though the mela extends for more than a fortnight, the main event is held on 14 january, a day after lohri, and is considered as one of the most important of all religious gatherings of the sikhs. sikhs consider it to be a pious occasion to take a dip in the holy pond of the sri muktsar sahib gurdwaras on that day. despite the biting cold, devotees came in droves from punjab and neighbouring areas, including haryana and rajasthan, to pay obeisance at gurdwaras here. apart from the religious activities, several political parties hold rallies in the city during the mela. the mela celebrates the unique diversity of punjabi tradition and culture in an ambiance representing the ethos of rural india. several temporary stalls line the road selling a variety of wares from kirpans to kitchen-ware to refurbished clothing. a makeshift amusement park is created, which features circus, giant wheel, merry-go-round, wall of death, toy train and similar rides, along with food stalls.
mukt-e-minar[edit]
in may 2005, the then chief minister of punjab, amrinder singh, inaugurated mukt-e-minar, which is the world's tallest khanda. an 81-foot double edged sword shaped structure, it has 40 rings around it, symbolizing the 40 sikhs that died during the battle of sri muktsar sahib. the memorial was dedicated to the 300 year anniversary of the last mughal-khalsa battle, where the khalsa forces defeated the enemy.
