sri-muktsar-sahib
Law and government[edit]
law and government[edit]
local self government[edit]
the city is based on a municipal council form of government the municipal council is an institution which acts within the frame work set up by the punjab government and draws its powers from legislative enactment. it is managed by persons elected from among the public. in many respects, these institutions are independent but work under the oversight of the punjab government. the sources of income of the municipality include house tax, toll tax, water and sewerage rate, license fee, building fee, professional tax, entertainment tax, liquor tax and some minor taxes. the sri muktsar sahib municipality was constituted in april 1876 by the british raj. the civic amenities provided by the municipal council include water supply, street lights, drainage, brick pavement of streets, cleanliness of the town and disposal of refuse. the municipal council maintains 28 miles (45 km) of roads. about 75 per cent of the town has sewerage facilities. street lights have been installed in about 90 per cent of the town. the municipal council runs a public library and a reading room. it also maintains two parks.
administration[edit]
the city's administration is managed by a civil sub divisional officer, reporting to the deputy commissioner of the sri muktsar sahib district. this position is responsible for co-ordinating the work of departments, the development activities, the revenue administration and the law and order of the city. also, this position responds to the grievances of the public and attends to the problems arising out of natural calamities. the job profile for this position is also to act as the assistant collector under the punjab land revenue act and punjab tenancy act. the profile is the appellate authority in cases decided by the subordinate revenue officers. a sub-divisional magistrate placed by the state government is the executive magistrate of sri muktsar sahib, who reports to the district magistrate and is responsible for the maintenance of law and order within the limits of local jurisdiction, and also hears court cases. the other administrative positions include tehsildar, naib tehsildar, kanungo and patwari.
police[edit]
the law and order situation of sri muktsar sahib is directly managed by the deputy superintendent of police, also known as assistant commissioner of police and is an officer of indian police service cadre, who reports to the senior superintendent of the district sri muktsar sahib police. sri muktsar sahib police, which forms a part of punjab police, functions from two police stations: police station – city and police station – sadar.
