srinagar
Culture
culture
like the territory  of jammu and kashmir, srinagar too has a distinctive blend of cultural heritage. holy places in and around the city depict the historical cultural and religious diversity of the city as well as the kashmir valley.
places of worship
there are many religious holy places in srinagar. they include:
hazratbal shrine, only domed mosque in the city. jama masjid, srinagar, one of the oldest mosques in kashmir khanqah-e-moula, first islamic centre in kashmir aali masjid, in eidgah locality hari parbat hill hosts shrine of sharika mata temple zeashta devi shrine a holy shrine for kashmiri hindus shankaracharya temple gurdwara chatti patshahi pathar masjid all saints church, srinagar holy family catholic church (srinagar)
additional structures include the dastgeer sahib shrine, mazar-e-shuhada, roza bal shrine, khanqah of shah hamadan, pathar masjid ("the stone mosque"), hamza makhdoom shrine, tomb of the mother of zain-ul-abidin, tomb of pir haji muhammad, akhun mulla shah mosque, cemetery of baha-ud-din sahib, tomb and madin sahib mosque at zadibal. apart from these, dozens of smaller mosques are located all over the city. several temples and temple ghats are located on the banks of river jhelum in srinagar, including shurayar temple, gadhadhar temple, pratapishwar temple,  ganpatyar ganesh temple, purshyar temple, sheshyar temple, raghunath mandir, durga patshala and dhar temple. gurdwaras are located in rainawari, amira kadal, jawahar nagar, mehjoor nagar, shaheed gunj, maharajpur and indra nagar areas of the city. there are three christian churches in srinagar.
the sheikh bagh cemetery is a christian cemetery located in srinagar that dates from the british colonial era. the oldest grave in the cemetery is that of a british colonel from the 9th lancers of 1850 and the cemetery is valued for the variety of persons buried there which provides an insight into the perils faced by british colonisers in india. it was damaged by floods in 2014. it contains a number of war graves. the notable interments here are robert thorpe and jim borst.
hazratbal shrine built in around 1700 ad       the shankaracharya temple built in around 200 bc       khanqah-e-moula       sharika mata temple       pathar masjid       gurdwara chatti patsahi
performing arts

main article: music of kashmir
