srinagar
Transport
transport
srinagar international airport
a passenger train at srinagar railway station
road
the city is served by many highways, including national highway 1a and national highway 1d.
air
srinagar international airport has regular domestic flights to leh, jammu, chandigarh, delhi and mumbai and occasional international flights. an expanded terminal capable of handling both domestic and international flights was inaugurated on 14 february 2009 with air india express flights to dubai. hajj flights also operate from this airport to saudi arabia.
rail

main articles: srinagar railway station and srinagar metro
srinagar is a station on the 119 km (74 mi) long banihal-baramulla line that started in october 2009 and connects baramulla to srinagar, anantnag and qazigund. the railway track also connects to banihal across the pir panjal mountains through a newly constructed 11 km long banihal tunnel, and subsequently to the indian railway network after a few years. it takes approximately 9 minutes and 30 seconds for a train to cross the tunnel. it is the longest rail tunnel in india. this railway system, proposed in 2001, is not expected to connect the indian railway network until 2017 at the earliest, with a cost overrun of 55 billion inr. the train also runs during heavy snow.
there are proposals to develop a metro system in the city. the feasibility report for the srinagar metro is planned to be carried out by delhi metro rail corporation.
cable car
vtesrinagar cable car   legend              makhdoom sahib (hari parbat)                                                                  malkhah cemetery
in december 2013, the 594m cable car allowing people to travel to the shrine of the sufi saint hamza makhdoom on hari parbat was unveiled. the project is run by the jammu and kashmir cable car corporation (jkccc), and has been envisioned for 25 years. an investment of 300 million inr was made, and it is the second cable car in kashmir after the gulmarg gondola.
boat
whilst popular since the 7th century, water transport is now mainly confined to dal lake, where shikaras (wooden boats) are used for local transport and tourism. there are efforts to revive transportation on the river jhelum.
