tezpur
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]
tezpur has several places to visit:
agnigarh: this hillock on bank of river brahmaputra is the site of legendary romance of princess usha (the only daughter of king banasura) and aniruddha , the grandson of lord krishna . according to legend, usha was kept on this hillock which was surrounded by fire, hence the name of agnigarh. mahabhairav temple: the ancient temple of mahabhairab stands to the north of tezpur town. according to legend, the temple is believed to have been established by king bana with a siva lingam. formerly, this temple was built of stone but the present one is built of concrete. during the later years, the ahom kings donated devottar land for the temple and pujaris and paiks were appointed to look after the temple. chitralekha udyan (cole park): it is one of the most beautiful places in tezpur. established by a british deputy commissioner, mr. cole in 1906, the park has two massive ornamented stone pillars, and other sculptural remnants . it was renovated and revitalized in 1996 under the stewardship of the then deputy commissioner, mr. m.g.v.k.bhanu, ias. it has water sports facility, walk ways, restaurant and open air stage. padum pukhuri: this is a beautiful lake with an island. the island has been developed into a beautiful park with a musical fountain. there is an iron bridge to take you to the island. on the lake one can boat. trimurty udyan: this is a park along borpukhuri. this has been named after the three jewels of assamese culture: rupkowar jyoti prasad agarwalla, kalaguru bishnu prasad rabha and natasurjya phani sarmah. rudrapada temple: to the east of tezpur town, on the bank of river brahmaputra the rudrapada temple is situated. it is believed that rudra ( lord shiva ) had left the print of his left foot (pada) on a stone found in the temple. it is believed that mahadeva showed his real self to king bana here. rudrapada temple was later built by siva singha in the year 1730. the main temple was destroyed, due to erosion of river brahmaputra. bhomoraguri: it is a mammoth stone inscription made by the ahom general kalia bhomora borphukan, who planned to construct a bridge over brahmaputra. almost two centuries later, a bridge at the same site now stands completed. the 3.015 km bridge, named after the great ahom general, connects silghat of nagaon district with tezpur. bamuni hills: the ruins of bamuni hills are famous for their exemplary artistic finesse. the sculptural remains date back to the ninth and tenth century a.d. the hazara pukhuri: it is a large tank in name of harjar varman in tezpur. it was excavated in the early part of the 9th century.
