thanjavur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main articles: transport in thanjavur and thanjavur air force station
nh 67 in thanjavur city
the national highways nh 83 and nh 36 pass through thanjavur and nh 136 and nh 67 connect thanjavur respectively with perambalur and thiruvurur. the city is connected with nagapattinam, thiruvarur, chennai, coimbatore, erode, karur, tirupur, vellore, perambalur, ariyalur, mysuru, salem, cuddalore, viluppuram, tiruchirappalli, madurai, kumbakonam, mayiladuthurai, karaikal, mannargudi, thiruthuraipoondi, vedaranyam, pattukkottai, dindigul, oddanchatram, palani, pudukkottai, karaikudi, tirunelveli, bengaluru, ernakulam, nagercoil, tirupathi, trivandrum and ooty through regular bus services. thanjavur had a single bus terminus located at the heart of the city. an integrated bus terminus, called new bus stand was constructed in 1997 near raja serfoji college to handle the passenger traffic. thanjavur has a well-maintained sub-urban public transport system. government and private buses operate frequently between the two bus termini and other towns and villages like vallam, budalur, mohamed bunder, nadukkavery, pillaiyarpatti, vallam pudursethi, sengipatti, ammapettai, mariamman kovil, thiruvaiyaru and kuruvadipatti.
thanjavur junction railway station
the railway line connecting tiruchirappalli junction railway station to chennai egmore via thanjavur, the main line is a historical line established by south indian railway company in 1879. the great southern of india railway company (gsir) operated a broad gauge rail service between nagapattinam and tiruchirapalli via thanjavur between 1861 and 1875. during 1875 it was converted to a meter gauge line (mg line). modern day thanjavur railway junction has three rail heads leading to tiruchirapalli, kumbakonam and thiruvarur. thanjavur is connected by rail with most important cities and towns in india. there are daily express trains to chennai, mysuru, ernakulam, thrissur, palakkad, coimbatore, erode, tiruppur, tiruchirapalli, salem, karur, madurai, tirunelveli, rameswaram, tiruchendur, cuddalore, dharmapuri, viluppuram, chengalpattu, mannargudi, bengaluru, dindigul, pudukkottai, karaikudi, sivagangai, manamadurai and weekly trains to pondicherry, nagercoil, kanyakumari, tirupati, nellore, itarsi, visakhapatnam, hubli, vasco da gama, goa, vijayawada, chandrapur, nagpur, jabalpur, satna, katni, allahabad, varanasi, jaunpur, ayodhya, and bhubaneswar. there are frequent passenger trains from the city to towns like thiruvarur, nagapattinam, karaikal, tiruchirapalli, kumbakonam, mayiladuthurai and nagore.
in the early 1990s, thanjavur was connected with chennai via the vayudoot flight service, which was stopped due to poor patronage. a full-fledged air force station is operational at thanjavur. thanjavur air force station was to become a major air base by 2012, to handle fighter, transport aircraft and also refuelling aircraft. however, the inauguration of the thanjavur air force station took place in 27 may 2013. the thanjavur air force station bases a squadron of its sukhoi su-30 supermaneuverability fighter aircraft at thanjavur, making it the first fighter squadron in tamil nadu. the nearest airport is tiruchirapalli international airport. the nearest seaport is located at nagapattinam.
