thanjavur
Utility services[edit]
utility services[edit]
electricity supply to thanjavur is regulated and distributed by the tamil nadu electricity board (tneb). the city along with its suburbs is a part of trichy electricity distribution circle. water supply is provided by the thanjavur corporation from the vadavar canal, supplied through overhead tanks located in various parts of the city. during the 2000–01 period, a total of 31 million litres of water was supplied every day for households in the city.
about 110 metric tonnes of solid waste are collected from thanjavur every day by door-to-door collection and subsequently the source segregation and dumping is carried out by the sanitary department of the thanjavur corporation. the coverage of solid waste management had an efficiency of 100% as of 2001. the underground drainage system covers 70% of the city and the remaining sewerage system for disposal of sullage is through septic tanks, open drains and public conveniences. the corporation maintains a total of 155 km (96 mi) of storm water drains: 53.27 km (33.10 mi) surfaced drains and 101.73 km (63.21 mi) unlined drains.
there are 37 hospitals and seven clinical labs in thanjavur that take care of the health care needs of the citizens. there are a total of 9,745 street lamps: 492 sodium lamps, 2,061 mercury vapour lamps, 7,180 tube lights and twelve high-mast beam lamps. the corporation operates three markets, namely the serfoji market, amarar swaminathan market and kamaraj market and another market, the subramaniya swami koil market, is maintained by the subramania swami temple authority. thanjavur comes under the thanjavur telecom circle of the bharat sanchar nigam limited (bsnl), india's state-owned telecom and internet services provider. apart from telecom, bsnl also provides broadband internet service. the regional passport office, trichy, operates a passport seva kendra (psk) in thanjavur, which psk covers the nagappattinam, thiruvarur, thanjavur, pudukkottai, and ariyalur revenue districts.
