thiruvananthapuram
Sports
sports

main article: sports in thiruvananthapuram
sports hub (greenfield stadium) during the india vs new zealand t20

a football match in csn stadiumbadminton at toss academy
the most popular sports in thiruvananthapuram are cricket and football. the city hosted the first international cricket match in kerala at the university stadium in 1984. the city also hosted the first twenty20 international cricket match in kerala. the kerala cricket association is headquartered in thiruvananthapuram. prominent cricketers from thiruvananthapuram include sanju samson, raiphi gomez, ryan ninan, aneil nambiar, k. n. ananthapadmanabhan, rohan prem, udiramala subramaniam, p. m. k. mohandas, bhaskar pillai and padmanabhan prasanth. the sports hub, university stadium, st xavier's college ground, kca cricket stadium mangalapuram, medical college ground and vellyani agricultural college ground are the main cricket grounds in the city. the sports hub, trivandrum, commonly known as greenfield stadium is one of the largest cricket and football stadiums in india. thiruvananthapuram hosted the 2015 saff championship at the greenfield stadium. sbi kerala, titanium fc, kseb, kovalam fc and travancore royals fc are the major football clubs based in thiruvananthapuram. football is usually played in the greenfield international stadium(the sports hub), chandrasekharan nair stadium and university stadium. prominent football players from thiruvananthapuram include jobby justin, vinu jose, thomas sebastian, m rajeev kumar and ganeshan.
the city has facilities to host most types of sports. thiruvananthapuram was one of the main venues for the 2015 national games of india. athletic competitions are usually held at the university stadium, chandrasekharan nair stadium and central stadium. the trivandrum marathon is a marathon organised by the trivandrum runners club every year. there will be two main races; a half marathon of 21 km and a full marathon of 42.19 km. a special 2 km fun run is also organised for public participation. trivand run is another marathon conducted every january in the city.
jimmy george indoor stadium is a major indoor stadium in the state. it is used for conducting basketball, volleyball, table tennis, gymnastics, aquatics and martial arts. the stadium has the first altitude-simulated training facility in south india, known as astra. the major sports training and coaching institutions include the lakshmibai national college of physical education (lncpe), toss academy and the tenvic sports coaching academy at the sports hub.
basketball tournaments are usually conducted by the schools in the city. thiruvananthapuram hosted the 61st national shooting championship at the vattiyoorkavu shooting range. surfing is also a popular sport on the beaches. many surfing and standup paddleboarding tournaments are held in the city. the surf competitions are usually held on kovalam beach and varkala beach. paragliding is another adventure sport usually seen on varkala beach.
the sai trivandrum golf club, established in 1850, is one of the oldest golf courses in india. it is leased to the sports authority of india.
