thiruvananthapuram
Economy
economy

main article: economy of thiruvananthapuram
view of technovalley, in the northwestern part of the city at night.
a part of infosys campus. thiruvananthapuram is a major it hub in india.
thiruvananthapuram's economy comprises information technology, education, plantations, aerospace, commerce and tourism. thiruvananthapuram district contributes 10.31%, of the state's gdp. with an economic growth rate of 13.83%, thiruvananthapuram is the fastest-growing district in kerala. thiruvananthapuram was listed as one of the top ten cities in india on vibrancy and consumption index by a study conducted by global financial services firm morgan stanley. state- and central-government employees make up a large percentage of the city's workforce. thiruvananthapuram is a major aerospace research centre in india. the vikram sarabhai space centre, the most significant and leading centre of isro, and several space-related, state-owned isro centres such as thumba equatorial rocket launching station, liquid propulsion systems centre, and isro inertial systems unit are based in thiruvananthapuram. the brahmos aerospace trivandrum limited is one of the leading missile integration and defence production units in india. other enterprises include travancore titanium products, kerala automobiles limited, milma, english indian clays, keltron, trivandrum rubber works and hll lifecare limited.
thiruvananthapuram is a major it and ites hub in india. the city contributes around 55% of kerala's total software exports. thiruvananthapuram houses major multinational technology companies like oracle corporation, nissan, allianz technology, envestnet, tata consultancy services, infosys, toonz animation india, ust global, ernst & young, flytxt, navigant, tata elxsi, mckinsey & company, rr donnelly and quest global. technopark is the largest information-technology park in india in terms of built-up area. it is the largest employment base campus in kerala with 52,000 it/ites professionals and about 400 companies. other it, media and industrial campuses include kinfra film and video park, kinfra apparel park, b-hub and chithranjali film complex. several new it, biotechnology and industrial campuses like technocity and bio 360 life sciences park are under construction.
tourism is a significant economic sector. the presence of natural attractions like beaches, backwaters, hills, and plantations and attractions like heritage, history, ayurveda, medical tourism and knowledge centres attract many tourists. the city experienced a surge of investment in the real estate, infrastructure and retail sectors in 2016–17.
port-related activity is low mainly due to the underdevelopment of ports. vizhinjam international seaport is a transhipment port under construction. vizhinjam port's location is close to the international shipping routes and, it is just 10–12 nautical miles from the busy persian gulf-malacca shipping lane. the port also has a natural depth of 18 to 20 metres which can accommodate huge container ships. the berths at vizhinjam port are designed to cater to vessels of up to 24,000 teu.
