thiruvananthapuram
Administration
administration

main article: administration of trivandrum district
kerala legislative assembly building
the corporation of thiruvananthapuram or tmc oversees and manages the civic infrastructure of the city's 100 wards. each ward elects a councillor to the corporation of thiruvananthapuram. tmc has the power to act as the local government of the city. tmc is headed by the mayor, who is elected from among the councillors. the mayor is responsible for the overall supervision and control of the administrative functions of the tmc. the corporation discharges its services through standing committees. the corporation secretary is an officer appointed by the government, who serves as the administrative head of the tmc and implements the council's decisions based on the resolutions adopted by the council. the functions of the municipal corporation are managed by seven departments—engineering, health, general administration, council, accounts and revenue. for the decentralised role of tmc, eleven zonal offices are created. the zonal offices are in fort, kadakampally, nemom, ulloor, attipra, thiruvallom, kazhakkuttom, sreekaryam, kudappanakunnu, vattiyoorkavu and vizhinjam. the functions of the tmc include water supply, drainage and sewerage, sanitation, solid-waste management, and building regulation. the thiruvananthapuram development authority is responsible for the statutory planning and development of the greater thiruvananthapuram region.
as the seat of the government of kerala, thiruvananthapuram is home to not only the offices of the local governing agencies but also the kerala legislative assembly and the state secretariat, which is housed in the kerala government secretariat complex. thiruvananthapuram has two parliamentary constituencies—attingal and thiruvananthapuram—and elects five members of the legislative assembly (mlas) to the state legislature.
the kerala government secretariat is the seat of administration of the government of kerala
law and order
the thiruvananthapuram city police is the main law-enforcement agency in the city. it is headed by a commissioner of police. the thiruvananthapuram city police is a division of the kerala police, and the administrative control lies with the kerala home ministry. thiruvananthapuram city police are the largest police division in kerala, and it consists of ten circle offices and 21 police stations and a sanctioned strength of 3,500 police personnel. the central prison is the oldest prison in kerala and the headquarters of kerala prisons and correctional services.
military and diplomatic establishments
the southern air command of the indian air force is headquartered in the city. there are two state armed police battalions and a unit of the central reserve police force (crpf) based in thiruvananthapuram. the crpf has a group headquarters (ghq) located at pallipuram. in addition to this, three units of the central industrial security force (cisf) and sector headquarters (shq) of the border security force (bsf) are also present. thiruvananthapuram also houses a large army cantonment in pangode which houses some regiments of the indian army.
in the city there is a consulate of the united arab emirates, a consulate of the maldives, and honorary consulates of sri lanka, russia and germany.
utility services
the kerala water authority supplies the city with water that is sourced from the karamana river; most of it is drawn from the aruvikkara and peppara reservoirs, and it is treated and purified at the aruvikkara pumping stations. the wellington water works, commissioned in 1933, is one of the oldest city water supply schemes in india. the sewage water is treated at muttathara sewage-treatment plant, which handles 32 million litres per day. the city area is divided into seven blocks for the execution of the sewage system. electricity is supplied by the kerala state electricity board. fire services are handled by the kerala fire and rescue services.
