thiruvananthapuram
Transport
transport
kowdiar road; also known as the royal road or "raja veedhi", as it leads to the kowdiar palaceanother road in the city

main article: transport in thiruvananthapuram
thiruvananthapuram international airport
public transport
a ksrtc double-decker bus in the city
the majority of bus services are conducted by government operators. there are also private operators. the city buses operated by kerala state road transport corporation (ksrtc) are an important and reliable means of public transport available in the city. the main bus stations in the city are the central bus station in thampanoor, where most of the long-distance buses ply from, and the city bus station in east fort, where most city buses ply from. three-wheeled, yellow and black auto-rickshaws and taxis, are other popular forms of public transport. thiruvananthapuram light metro is a fully elevated metro rail – rapid transit system planned to ease the congestion in the city.
road
thiruvananthapuram has a well-developed road transport infrastructure. the roads in the city are maintained by the thiruvananthapuram roads development company limited (trdcl) and kerala pwd. trdcl manages the 42 km city roads which come under the thiruvananthapuram city roads improvement project (trcip), which is the first urban road project in india. trcip is a public-private partnership project to improve and maintain the existing road network in the city to cater to the needs of rapid urbanisation. trcip has won the international road federation's global road achievement awards in 2015. tcrip has also been selected by united nations as a replicable public private partnership model. it was one of the 12 public-private partnership project case studies from across the world which fulfil the sustainable development goals of the un agenda 2030.
thiruvananthapuram is served by national highway 66 of india's national highways system. the city is connected to the north-south corridor of the national highway system at aralvaimozhi, which is 80 km south of the city. the state highway 1, which commonly known as the main central road is an arterial highway in the city. other major highways in the city are state highway 2 and state highway 45. the mahatma gandhi road is the main arterial road in the city. another important road is the kowdiar road, which is also known as the royal road, as it leads to the kowdiar palace.
rail
thiruvananthapuram is a divisional headquarters in the southern railway zone of the indian railways. long-distance trains originate from thiruvananthapuram central and kochuveli railway terminals. kochuveli railway terminal is developed to ease congestion on the central station and it acts as a satellite station to thiruvananthapuram central. thiruvananthapuram central is the busiest railway station in kerala. other railway stations in the city are thiruvananthapuram pettah, nemom railway station, veli railway station and kazhakoottam railway station. being the southernmost municipal corporation in india, many long train services of indian railways originate from thiruvananthapuram like trivandrum rajdhani express, thiruvananthapuram - silchar superfast express and kochuveli - amritsar weekly express. there are plans to develop a railway terminal at nemom railway station to reduce congestion at thiruvananthapuram central.
air
thiruvananthapuram is served by the thiruvananthapuram international airport, located at chakai, only 6.7 kilometres (4.2 mi) from the city centre. the airport started operations in 1935 and is the first airport in kerala. being one of the gateways to the state, it has direct connectivity to all the major cities in india as well as the middle east, malaysia, singapore, the maldives and sri lanka. as the city is headquarters of the southern air command (sac) of the indian air force, thiruvananthapuram international airport caters to the indian air force (iaf) and the coast guard for their strategic operations. iaf has an exclusive apron to handle all their operations. the airport also caters to the rajiv gandhi academy for aviation technology which carries out pilot-training activities.
sea
small cruise ships often dock at vizhinjam harbour. a cruise terminal is under construction at vizhinjam transshipment terminal. vizhinjam seaport has been designated by the government as an authorised immigration check-post for entry and exit from india for international ships and cruises.
