thiruvananthapuram
Culture
culture

main article: culture of thiruvananthapuram
established in 1855, the napier museum contains a vast collection of ancient paintings and archaeological artefacts
attukal pongala festival marks the world's largest gathering of women
thiruvananthapuram is known as the "evergreen city of india" because of its green landscapes and the presence of many public parks. thiruvananthapuram has historically been a cultural hub in south india due to the development of arts, architecture and liberal customs by the rulers of erstwhile thiruvananthapuram. as a testimony to this, renowned artists like maharaja swathi thirunal and raja ravi varma hail from the city. prominent social reformers such as sri narayana guru, chattampi swamikal, ayyankali, vakkom moulavi and c. v. raman pillai also are from thiruvananthapuram.
two of the three malayalam triumvirate poets, ulloor s. parameswara iyer and kumaran asan are from thiruvananthapuram. annual literature festivals like the kovalam literary festival, are held in the city. literary development is further aided by state institutions such as the state central library, one of the oldest public libraries in india, which was established in 1829, and other major libraries including the thiruvananthapuram corporation central library, and the kerala university library. thiruvananthapuram has been a hub of classical music since the days of maharaja of travancore, swathi thirunal. thiruvananthapuram is known for many music festivals like the navarathri music festival, one of the oldest festivals of its kind in south india, swathi sangeethotsavam, soorya music fest, neelakanta sivan music fest and many other music festivals are organised by various cultural groups. the 111-day-long soorya festival is the biggest art and cultural event in kerala. the soorya festival features film festivals, theatre festivals, dance, music, painting and photography exhibitions.
16th iffk 2011 banner at kairali theater complex
the malayalam film industry was started in thiruvananthapuram. the first malayalam feature film, vigathakumaran directed by j. c. daniel was released in thiruvananthapuram. j. c. daniel is considered the father of malayalam film industry. he also established the first film studio in kerala, the travancore national pictures at thiruvananthapuram in 1926. the international film festival of kerala (iffk), which is held every year in december, is one of asia's largest film festivals in terms of viewer participation. in addition to various film festivals, the presence of the central board of film certification's regional office, many movie studios and production facilities like the uma studio, chitranjali studio, merryland studio, kinfra film and video park and vismayas max contribute to the growth of thiruvananthapuram as a centre of cinema.
apart from the famous padmanabhaswamy temple, the city's architecture is championed by the napier museum and thiruvananthapuram zoo, one of the oldest zoos in india. other architectural landmarks include kuthira malika palace, kowdiar palace, attukal temple, beemapally mosque, connemara market, and the mateer memorial church. thiruvananthapuram was the main centre of laurie baker's architecture.
along with the major festivals of onam, vishu, deepavali, and navaratri, christian and islamic festivals like christmas, eid ul-fitr, bakrid and milad-e-sheriff, the diverse ethnic populace of the city celebrates several local festivals like attukal pongala, beemapally uroos, vettukaad church festival, padmanabhaswamy temple aaraattu and lakshadeepam festival. during the onam festival, the state government conducts several cultural events for a week in the city. the attukal pongala festival attracts millions of women devotees from across india and abroad. it is the largest gathering of women in the world. germany's goethe zentrum, france's alliance française and russia's gorky bhavan centres host a wide range of events and programmes throughout the year.
the general cuisine of the people is keralite cuisine, which is generally characterised by an abundance of coconut and spices. other south indian cuisines, as well as chinese and north indian cuisines, are popular. thiruvananthapuram has many restaurants offering arabic, italian, thai and mexican cuisines.
