thoothukudi
Education and utility services[edit]
education and utility services[edit]

main article: list of educational institutions in thoothukudi
there are 31 schools in thoothukudi city, of which 10 are operated by the municipal corporation. there are 31 high schools and higher secondary schools, one of which is a government school. tuticorin has high literacy rates and lower literacy rate gap between males and females. there are five arts and science colleges, three polytechnics in the city. it also has a fisheries college in the outskirts affiliated to tamil nadu dr. j. jayalalithaa fisheries university, nagapattinam. there is one government and many private engineering college affiliated to anna university in the city and arts colleges on tamizh salai and tiruchendur road. there is also a government medical college and hospital. the colleges are affiliated to the manonmaniam sundaranar university in tirunelveli. there are three industrial training institutes (iti) and about 50 computer training centres also. the city has government medical college hospital and new esi hospital is being constructed at the bypass road.
electricity supply to the city is regulated and distributed by the tamil nadu electricity board (tneb). usage of plastic polythene bags is banned inside corporation limits. thoothukudi is the headquarters of the thoothukudi region of tneb that has four divisions. the city along with its suburbs forms the thoothukudi electricity distribution circle. a chief distribution engineer is stationed at the regional headquarters. water supply is provided by the thoothukudi city corporation from the tamirabarani with 8 overhead tanks. in the period 2010–2011, a total of 21 million litres of water was supplied everyday for households in the city.
about 96 metric tonnes of solid waste are collected from the city every day by door-to-door collection and subsequently the source segregation and dumping is carried out by the sanitary department of the thoothukudi municipal corporation. the coverage of solid waste management had efficiency of 94% as of 2011. the underground drainage system was constituted in 1984 and covers only certain zones of the corporation area. the remaining sewerage system for disposal of sullage is through septic tanks and public conveniences. the corporation maintains a total of 69.47 kilometres (43.17 mi) of storm water drains. the corporation operates five health posts throughout the city. apart from these, there are various private hospitals and clinics that take care of the health care needs of the citizens.
thoothukudi comes under the thoothukudi telecom district of the bharat sanchar nigam limited (bsnl), india's state-owned telecom and internet services provider. both global system for mobile communications (gsm) and code division multiple access (cdma) mobile services are available. apart from telecom, bsnl also provides broadband internet service. thoothukudi is one of the few cities in india where bsnl's caller line identification (cli) based internet service netone is available.
