thoothukudi
Entertainment and leisure[edit]
entertainment and leisure[edit]
thoothukudi has all india radio station which carries air external services for south asia in english, sinhala and tamil (1053 khz). fm radio stations in thoothukudi city include suryan fm (93.5 mhz), hello fm (106.4 mhz). thoothukudi is the landing point for the first undersea cable of bsnl connecting thoothukudi with colombo.
the city has tharuvai multi purpose stadium which is maintained by sports development authority of tamil nadu. thoothukudi gymkhana club has two synthetic turf tennis courts, thoothukudi is the only other place after chennai in tamil nadu to have this modern facility. thoothukudi is known for its bakery items especially macaroon. it is a light, baked confection including ingredients like almonds, coconuts and nuts. thoothukudi macaroon is slightly different from european macaroons since it contains cashew as a main ingredient.
thoothukudi macroons
the shankara rameshwarar udanurai pagampriya temple, vaikundapathi perumal temple and jamia mosque in the centre of the town and the our lady of snows basilica in kadarkarai salai are the major religious attractions in the city. the church attracts lot of visitors around the country and is one of catholic pilgrimage centers in india dedicated to virgin mary. the church festival celebrated yearly during last week of july and first week of august, the shiva temple festivals like adi amavasai, sasti and chittirai chariot festivals are the major festivals of the land.
bharat ratna puratchi thalaivar m.g.r. park and rajaji park in tamizh salai, nehruji beach park and roche park in kadarkarai salai, m.g.r. park in kamarajar salai, sankara narayanan park in tooveypuram, kakkan park in boltenpuram and state bank colony park are the attracting corporation parks in the city.
harbor beach in jawaharlal nehru salai and muthu nagar beach in kadarkarai salai are the major beaches in the city. there are numerous islands located close to the city namely hare island (accessible by road), nalla thanni island which attracts lot of visitors during weekends and festival seasons. the creek opposite to roche park has an eco-park with kayaking facilities that operates everyday from 6 am to 6 pm. there are a variety of water sports activities in muthu nagar beach which includes jet skiing, water scooters, wind surfing, paddle surfing, bump rides, banana boat ride, fishing, snorkeling and scuba diving.
ksps ganapathy kalaiarangam, new cleopatra theatre, perison plaza multiscreen, sathya theatre, and sri balakrishna talkies are the movie theatres in the city for movie entertainment.
