thoothukudi
History[edit]
history[edit]
joão de castro, viceroy of portuguese india, established portuguese ports in thoothukudi (1548 to 1658)
thoothukudi is also known by the name 'pearl city'. it is also called as "sea gateway of tamil nadu". thoothukudi is part of the pearl fishery coast, and is known for its pearl fishing and shipbuilding industries.
the ancient town of korkai near present-day thoothukudi has been a centre for maritime trade and pearl fishery for more than 2000 years. ptolemy's geography refers to korkai as a centre of pearl fishery while describing commercial relations between western india and alexandria, the chief eastern emporium of the roman empire. the periplus says that the pandyan empire  extended from comari towards the north, including korkai, where the pearl fisheries were. eventully, the vijayanagara empire took over thoothukudi. conducted trade with the portuguese. the  empire split into nayak kingdoms, who got overthrown by the nawab of arcot. the nawab eventuality ceded the land to the british in 1801.
the portuguese established ports in thoothukudi during the 16th century, and the dutch occupied these ports in the 17th century as evidenced by pagoda coins. during the 18th century the british overpowered and occupied the town. being a port town, the town received attention from the rulers for improving their trade, and so it was brought to municipal status in 1866. rao bahadur cruz fernandez and j. l. p. roche victoria as the chairmen of municipal corporation made significant contributions, laying the foundations for a modern thoothukudi.
on 20 october 1986, a new district, carved out of the erstwhile tirunelveli district was born in tamil nadu and named after v. o. chidambaranar, a prominent national leader hailing from ottapidaram who led the swadeshi movement in the south. since 1997, as is the case in other districts of tamil nadu, this district has been named after its headquarters town, thoothukudi.
thoothukudi became the citadel of freedom struggles in the early of the 20th century.
history of the ports[edit]
view of the dutch port in thoothukudi, in 1752
the major harbour of thoothukudi is well known as a pearl diving and fishing centre. it is one of the oldest seaports in the world and was the seaport of the pandyan kingdom after korkai, near palayakayal. it was later taken over by the portuguese in 1548, captured by the dutch in 1658, and ceded to the british in 1825. the lighthouse built in 1842 marked the beginning of the history of harbour development in the city. thoothukudi was established as a municipality in 1866 with roche victoria as its first chairman.
it attained the status of corporation on 5 august 2008 after 142 years of being a municipality. thoothukudi corporation is divided into 60 wards after its expansion in the year 2011 and these wards are comprised in four zones—i.e., east, west, north, and south. east zone has 14–16 and 19–33 wards, west zone has 34–47 wards, north zone has 1–13 and 17, 18 wards and south zone has 48–60 wards.
the minor port of the thoothukudi anchorage port with lighter age facilities has had flourishing traffic for over a century. the first wooden jetty of this port was commissioned in 1864. this port was used for export of salt, cotton yarn, senna leaves, palmyrah stalks, palmyrah fibres, dry fish, country drugs, and other goods to neighbouring countries and for import of coal, cotton, copra, pulses and grains. the minor port of the thoothukudi has the distinction of being the intermediate port handling the highest traffic tonnage of over 1 million per annum.
