thoothukudi
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
salt pans near thoothukudi
night scapes of pearl city
salt pans in and around the city contribute majorly to the economy of the city. the salt pans produce 1.2 million tonnes of salt every year, contributing to 90% of the salt produced in the state and 50% needed by the chemical industries of the state.
the other major industries are shipping, fishing, agricultural, power and chemical industries. fishing is one of the largest contributor to the local economy. thoothukudi fishing harbor is one of the oldest and largest harbors in tamil nadu.
the thoothukudi thermal power station has five 210 mw generators. the first generator was commissioned in july 1979 and the newly built thermal power plant of 1000 mw by nlc and tangedco, the ntpl thermal power station. in addition to this there are several private power plants like ind-barath thermal power limited, coastal energen private limited, sterlite industries captive power plant. thoothukudi spinning mills ltd, southern petrochemical industries corporation, thoothukudi alkali chemicals and fertilizers limited, heavy water board plant, venus home appliances, s.k.s.c. nadarajan & bror, p. s. s. krishnamurthi exports private limited, madura coats private limited, dcw limited, kilburn chemicals ltd, nila sea foods, diamond sea foods
maris associates, vvd coconut oil mill, avm oil mill, ramesh flowers, agsar paints and ksps salts are some of the small scale and large scale industries in the city. thoothukudi is the headquarters city of leading private sector bank tamilnad mercantile bank limited located. it is one of the fastest growing banks in india during the period of 2007–2012. its total business is worth 360 billion. the bank targets a total business of 500 billion inr in 2014–15. the city also has a research institute set up by central marine fisheries research institute and a spices laboratory set up by spices board of india.
v.o. chidambaranar port authority
thoothukudi thermal power station at night
thoothukudi also has a state industries promotion corporation of tamil nadu industrial estate and sidco's industrial estate which comprises several small scale and medium scale industries. to cope with the increasing trade through thoothukudi, the government of india sanctioned the construction of an all-weather port at thoothukudi. on 11 july 1974, the newly constructed v.o. chidambaranar port authority was declared the tenth major port in india, second only to jn port (mumbai) in size. thoothukudi is an artificial port. during the union budget of 2014–2015, the central government sanctioned an 11,500 crore outer harbour development program for thoothukudi port which is expected to give a push to the export-import sector in southern tamil nadu. the project would commence in 2015 and be completed by 2020. the dpr for outer harbour was released recently by the union shipping minister. as a port city, almost all major logistics companies have set up office in thoothukudi. the port also has a dedicated container terminal operated by psa international. the port recently commenced the operation of 2nd container terminal by abg (dbgit) pvt ltd. the port handled 0.5 million teu's in 2013–2014 to become third largest container port among major ports of india. the port is also a significant port due to the fact that it is located close to east-west international sea route. the port has direct cargo and container vessel connectivity to all major ports in the world like colombo, singapore, jnpt (mumbai), mundra, jebel ali, salalah, rotterdam, karachi, hong kong and much more. this is the third international port in tamil nadu and its second all-weather port. the port also helps to increase the tourism in the region. a new ferry has been commenced between thoothukudi and colombo. the station commander, indian coast guard station thoothukudi is located at thoothukudi, tamil nadu under the operational and administrative control of the commander, coast guard region (east), chennai. the coast guard station thoothukudi was commissioned on april 25, 1991, by vice admiral sw lakhar, nm, vsm and then director general coast guard. the station commander is responsible for coast guard operations in this area of jurisdiction in gulf of mannar.
thoothukudi is the end point of the proposed madurai-thoothukudi industrial corridor. the study for this corridor was completed by the government of tamil nadu recently. the corridor would consist of four manufacturing regions, one agri-business region, two business investment regions, a special tourism zone, one rural tourism hub and one knowledge hub. the government estimates that this corridor would attract 1,900,000 crore industrial investment over a period of 10 years. the state government recently formed a special purpose vehicle (spv) for speedy implementation of the project. the upcoming new railway line from madurai to thoothukudi via aruppukotai, ettayapuram would serve as the backbone for the development of this corridor.
