thoothukudi
Environmental Issues[edit]
environmental issues[edit]
air pollution is the major environmental challenge faced by thoothukudi while water and noise pollution are environmental issues too. thoothukudi is the only city from the state of tamil nadu to be listed as one of the non-attainment cities by ministry of environment primarily on the basis of excess pm10 under the national ambient air quality monitoring program (namp) for the period 2011 - 2015.
the city has a lot of red industries as a result of which the pm10 — tiny airborne particles seven times finer than human hair–exceeds national standards (60 micrograms per cubic metre, or μg/m) by around 200 per cent. indian standards for pm10 is three times higher than who standards for pm10 particles which is 20 micrograms per cubic metre. environmentalists blame public and private coal-fired thermal power plants, copper smelter and chemical industries for polluting the air quality of thoothukudi.
a 2010 study published in the journal of ecobiotechnology cites industrial pollution in thoothukudi as a major cause for various health issues. respondents of the study had various health issues like skin diseases, eye irritation, asthma, allergy, respiratory problems, cancer and hypertension. the study also observed that industrial disposals and other chemical contaminates that enter waterways through agricultural runoff, storm water drains, and industrial discharges may persist in the environment for long periods and be transported by water or air over long distances. they disturbed the function of the endocrine system, resulting in reproductive, developmental, and behavioral problems. the endocrine disrupters reduced the fertility and increased the occurrence of still births, birth defects, and hormonally dependent cancers such as breast, testicular, and prostate cancers. the effects on the developing nervous system can include impaired mental and psychomotor development, as well as cognitive impairment and behavior abnormalities. studies like these led the people of thoothukudi to protest for the closing of the sterlite plant in may 2018. on the 22nd of that month, the police opened fire on protestors killing 13 and injuring 102. the plant was soon closed.
