thoothukudi
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in thoothukudi
port of thoothukudi during the madras presidency, c.a. 1913

thoothukudi has an extensive transport network and is well-connected to other major cities by road, rail, air and sea. the corporation maintains a total length of 428.54 km (266.28 mi). the city has 37.665 km (23.404 mi) concrete roads, 329.041 km (204.457 mi) black topped surface roads, 56.592 km (35.165 mi) water bound macadam roads and 5.242 km (3.257 mi) earthen roads. the major roads within the city are tamizh salai connecting nh-138, kamarajar salai connecting nh-38, ramanathapuram road connecting sh-49, tiruchendur road connecting sh-176, v.o. chidambaranar salai and victoria extension road. the highway v.o.c. salai outside the city connects the port authority, thermal power station, spic industry and nh-38. the city has two bus termini; perarignar anna bus terminus in tamizh salai and thoothukudi new bus terminus in kamarajar salai. about 700 buses are operated from these two bus stands to local and inter cities.
the tamil nadu state transport corporation operates daily services connecting various cities to thoothukudi. a new regional headquarters of tnstc is being established in thoothukudi which enables better transportation by government buses. the corporation operates a computerised reservation centre in the bus stand of the city. the state express transport corporation operates long-distance buses connecting the city to important cities like bengaluru, chennai, vellore, nagapattinam and kanniyakumari. thoothukudi being a harbour city has lot of container truck transport. as of 2008, the number of container trucks entering the city is 1000. the expansion of ecr from thoothukudi to kanniyakumari via tiruchendur and koodankulam at a cost of  2.57 billion sanctioned and is in progress.
thoothukudi railway station is one of the oldest and popular railway stations in india. it is one of few stations in southern tamil nadu to have pitline facility for cleaning and maintenance of rail coaches facilitating the operation of long distance trains from thoothukudi. the line between madurai and thoothukudi was opened in 1874. the lines connecting to thoothukudi is being electrified recently. thoothukudi has direct daily rail connectivity to chennai, mysore, coimbatore, okha, tirunelveli. vivek express which connects thoothukudi with okha. pearl city express which connects thoothukudi with chennai egmore station is one of the prestigious trains of southern railway. an 8 coach link train to guruvayur express has been introduced recently which connects thoothukudi with chennai during daytime. south indian railway began a madras – thoothukudi service connecting with the boat to ceylon in 1899. the station was declared a model station in 2007 and several infrastructure developments are in process. there is also another station, known as thoothukudi melur.
thoothukudi airport is at vagaikulam, 14 km (9 mi) from the heart of the city. it has flights to bengaluru and chennai operated by indigo, it operate daily four services to chennai and one trip to bengaluru. the state government and airport authority of india plans to extend the runway and modernise the airport to handle to more traffic and bigger aircraft. the land acquisition process is completed and aai is ready to start the expansion works. a new terminal has been planned and the runway is to expanded to facilitate the movement of airbus a320 and boeing 737s. there was also a proposal in 2009 for a greenfield airport. madurai airport is the nearest customs airport with daily international connections to colombo and dubai. thiruvananthapuram international airport in kerala is the nearest international airport located at a distance of about 200 km (124 mi).
v.o. chidambaranar port authority is an artificial deep-sea harbour. it is one of the major ports in india. a luxury ferry liner, the scotia prince, was operating a ferry service to colombo, sri lanka. ferry services between the two countries have been revived after more than 20 years.
