thrissur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

main article: economy of thrissur
thrissur is home to many malayaliee entrepreneurs, and is a major financial and commercial hub of kerala. historians say that king sakthan thampuran invited syrian christian families and brahmins to settle in thrissur city from their business centres in adjoining areas. soon, thrissur became a flourishing centre of internal trade in kerala. thrissur is one of the major manufacturing centres of plain gold and rolled gold jewellery in south india; up to 70% of kerala's jewellery is manufactured in thrissur. there are around 3,000 gold ornaments manufacturing units in the city and 40,000-odd artisans and others work in these units. the industry provides direct and indirect employment to 200,000 people in thrissur. the artisans based in these units, craft nearly 85 percent of one tonne gold which is used per day in kerala. about 90 tonnes of gold was being used annually in kerala for manufacturing of ornaments daily.
the town hall in thrissur
according to the reserve bank of india, thrissur has been regarded as a banking town since the 1930s, when 58 banks were headquartered in the city. in the present, the city remains a significant centre for banking and finance, with the headquarters of major banks like south indian bank, catholic syrian bank, dhanalakshmi bank, and other financial institutions like manappuram general finance and leasing, kerala state financial enterprise and esaf small finance bank. many chit funds, a type of indian savings and credit system, are located in thrissur. in 2010, an estimated 3,000 chit fund companies were located in thrissur, employing approximately 35,000 people.
south indian bank headquarters in thrissur city
the city is a hub for the ayurvedic drug-manufacturing industry. out of the 850 ayurvedic drug-manufacturing companies in kerala, about 150, including some of the largest in the state like oushadhi, vaidyaratnam oushadhasala, kp namboodiris, are located in and around the city. thrissur ayurveda cluster, another initiative by a group of ayurvedic manufacturers of thrissur, has developed a cluster in kinfra park in koratty in thrissur district.
retail businesses in thrissur include kalyan group, jos alukka & sons, joyalukkas and josco group. infopark thrissur, the fourth technology park in kerala, is situated in thrissur district. tourism has also contributed heavily to the economy of thrissur. domestic tourists generally use the city as a hub to explore the highly promoted tourism industry of the state of kerala. the city with its temples, old churches and its culture, is ranked first in the number of domestic tourists visiting kerala.
