thrissur
Media[edit]
media[edit]
the first malayalam newspaper which published from thrissur was lokamanyan in 1920. then came deenabandhu edited by v. r. krishnan ezhuthachan. ezhuthachan started publishing as a weekly in 1941 from thrissur. it was one of the first periodicals that supported the national movement. as soon as the quit india movement was started, its editor and staff were sent to jail and publications were banned. later lokamanyan (1920); kerala chintamani (1905); kerala kesari (1924); mahatma (1930); gomathy (1930) and navajeevan of joseph mundassery was also published from thrissur. the express started in 1944 from thrissur with k krishanan as the editor is known in central kerala for its nationalist and socialist views. major malayalam newspapers published in thrissur include malayala manorama, mathrubhumi, madhyamam, deepika, kerala kaumudi,  deshabhimani, mangalam, veekshanam, metro vaartha and janayugom. a number of evening papers, like general in malayalam and city journal in english, are also published from the city. newspapers in other regional languages like hindi, kannada, tamil and telugu are also available in city.
the first cinema hall in kerala, with a manually operated film projector, was opened in thrissur by jose kattookkaran in 1907. in 1913, the first electrically operated film projector was established in city again by jose kattookkaran and was called the jose electrical bioscope now known as jose theatre.
a film festival, known as vibgyor film festival, is held in the city every year. it is an international short and documentary film festival. telephony services are provided by various players like aircel, airtel, idea cellular, vodafone, reliance infocomm, tata docomo, mts, uninor, tata indicom and the state owned bsnl. bsnl is also offering 3g services in thrissur. the city also have broadband wireless services on wimax platform.
private fm radio stations in the thrissur are club fm 104.8 mhz, radio mango 91.9  mhz, best fm 95 by (asianet communications limited), red fm 91.1 mhz. all india radio has an am (630 khz) and an fm (101.1 mhz) station for the city. the transmitter of the all india radio (630 khz) was commissioned on 4 november 1956. the station started independent broadcasting in 1974. thrissur has a doordarshan studio with a low power transmitter located near the studio.
