thrissur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

shaktan thampuran private bus stand, thrissur, is the largest private bus station in kerala state.thrissur railway stationschematic road network map of thrissur city

main article: transport in thrissur
road[edit]
the city is connected to the north-south corridor national highway (india) via the four-lane national highway 544, previously nh 47. the highway traverses through the entire length and breadth of the city from different points and provides access to the nearby cities such of kochi, palakkad and coimbatore. nh 544 provides two main exit points at mannuthy and thalore which is bypass to the thrissur city.
the city is largely dependent on private buses, taxis and auto rickshaws for public transport. a transit terminal was announced for puzhakkal in 2013. land was transferred to the thissur mobility hub society on a 99-year lease in 2015.
state-owned kerala state road transport corporation (ksrtc) runs inter-state, inter-district and city services. thrissur has three bus stations, the shaktan thampuran private bus stand, thrissur in sakthan thampuran nagar, vadakke stand (northern bus stand) and the thrissur ksrtc bus station near the thrissur railway station. state highway (sh 69) thrissur-kuttippuram road, sh 22 kodungallur – shornur road, sh 75 thrissur – kanjani – vadanappally road are the three state highways which connect city with its suburbs and municipalities.
railway[edit]
the southern railway zone of the indian railways operates the main rail transport system in thrissur. there are four railway stations in thrissur city. thrissur railway station, one of the four a+ railway station in kerala provides trains to three directions and lies on the busy shoranur–cochin harbour section. it has a satellite station, punkunnam railway station and two minor stations, ollur railway station and mulankunnathukavu railway station. thrissur railway station also connects to the temple town of guruvayur by guruvayur–thrissur spur line. in addition, southern railway is running a suburban railway system connecting thrissur to kochi and palakkad using mainline electrical multiple unit services (memu).
requirements[edit]
trivandrum bound ksrtc service via irinjalakuda, kodungallur, paravoor, vytilla
