thrissur
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: history of thrissur
the presence of numerous prehistoric megaliths and dolmens indicate that thrissur has been occupied since at least 1000 bce to 500 ce.
image of main entrance of vadakkunnathan temple seen from swaraj round from illustrated guide to the south indian railway
the portuguese had naval influence in many parts of kerala in the 16th century, including thrissur. in the beginning of the 17th century the portuguese naval power was reduced and dutch became the main naval power. with the help of the dutch, the royal family of the kingdom of cochin recaptured thrissur from the zamorin of calicut in 1710.
thrissur rose to importance after maharaja sakthan thampuran ascended the throne of kingdom of cochin (1769–1805) and made thrissur his capital. the maharaja made the city into a major financial and commercial hub of south india, by inviting syrian christian families and brahmins from adjoining areas.
during 1750–60 hyder ali, the sultan of the powerful kingdom of mysore, conquered thrissur, making it a tributary of mysore. in 1786, the son of tipu sultan of mysore led another invasion of thrissur, but retreated after the srirangapattanam war. in the meantime, rama varma x, the successor of sakthan thampuran signed a treaty with the east india company, transforming the state of cochin into a british protectorate.
the first known map of thrissur city with vadakkunnathan temple prepared by john gould in 1816
the indian independence movement gained momentum after a committee was formed at the 1919 meeting of the indian national congress. the civil disobedience movement attracted many people in thrissur in subsequent years, and mahatma gandhi visited the city in 1927 and 1934 to promote it.
r. k. shanmukham chetty, the controversial diwan of cochin kingdom from 1935 to 1941, developed the city by constructing thrissur town hall and ramanilayam, buildings which remain important in kerala politics. other important civic buildings and infrastructure constructed around this time include the municipal corporation building of thrissur and the swaraj round.
in 1947, when india gained independence from colonial rule, thrissur was part of the kingdom of cochin. thrissur district was formed on 1 july 1949, with the headquarters at the city of thrissur.
