thrissur
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
asia's tallest church, the our lady of dolours syro-malabar catholic basilica is situated in the middle of thrissur city
festivals[edit]
kerala sahitya academy building in thrissur
thrissur is known as the cultural capital of kerala, the city enjoys a thriving cultural tradition dating back to centuries. thrissur pooram, the largest pooram in kerala, is sometimes referred to as 'the pooram of all poorams'. it is celebrated every year in the month of medam (mid-april to mid-may) as per the malayalam calendar. for thirty-six hours, the city plays host to a large gathering of people and elephants.
puli kali, also known as kavakali, is another festival, which attracts thousands of people to the city. it is performed by trained artists to entertain people on the occasion of onam, an annual harvest festival, celebrated mainly in kerala. buon natale is the cultural festival conducting at swaraj round with christmas celebration. buon natale procession entered the guinness world records in 2014 for having the maximum number of people dressed up as santa claus. other important festivals celebrated in the city include christmas, onam, diwali, easter, eid and vishu.
elephants play a major part in many of the city's festivals. aanayoottu (feeding of elephants), held in vadakkunnathan temple in the city annually, is the world's largest elephant feeding ceremony. the ceremony is conducted on the first day of the malayalam month of karkidakam.
literature[edit]
literary lineage of city dates back to early history of kerala but it came to prominence after kerala government set up kerala lalita kala akademi, kerala sahitya academy, kerala sangeetha nadaka academy and college of fine arts, thrissur for promoting literature, music and arts in kerala. after the indian independence, thrissur became the literary capital of kerala as turned to the playground of novelist, poets and orators. in 1952 when current books set its first shop in thrissur by former education minister professor joseph mundassery, it become the abode of writer's like o. v. vijayan, kovilan, v. k. n., uroob, edasseri govindan nair, m. t. vasudevan nair, k. g. sankara pillai and sarah joseph. the area was later known as current moola ("current corner"). the building that housed the current books bookshop was demolished in 2011.
thrissur is home to prominent malayalam literary figures like kovilan, kunhunni mash, sukumar azhikode, k. satchidanandan, mullanezhi, sarah joseph, attoor ravi varma, lalitha lenin, p. bhaskaran, joseph mundassery.
religious buildings[edit]
one of the four vadakumnathan temple gates, inside the swaraj maidan
cheraman juma mosque, said to be the oldest mosque in india

for more, see places of worship in thrissur.
the vadakkunnathan temple, believed to have been founded by the legendary saint parasurama, is an example of the kerala style of architecture and houses several sacred shrines and murals delineating graphically, various episodes from the mahabharata. thiruvambadi sri krishna temple, one of the largest sree krishna temples in kerala and paramekkavu bagavathi temple which is one of the largest bagavathi temples in kerala is also situated in the city. aykunnu pandavagiri devi temple is situated at venginisseri village, that around 9 km from city center. sree guruvayurappan temple is located in guruvayur (28 km from thrissur); it is also referred to as bhuloka vaikunta which means "holy abode of vishnu on earth".
asia's tallest church, the our lady of dolours syro-malabar catholic basilica (puthan pally), our lady of lourdes syro-malabar catholic metropolitan cathedral which has an underground shrine, saint antony's syro-malabar church, ollur which has been called as chinna roma (small rome) are masterpieces of architecture and indigenous paintings. saint euphrasia's tomb and museum also situated in the city. st. thomas syro-malabar church, palayur (28 km from thrissur) is the first church in india , and thomas the apostle performed the first baptism in india here.
the chettiyangadi hanafi mosque in thrissur city is one of the oldest mosque in thrissur. cheraman juma mosque in kodungallur, (40 km from thrissur) is the first mosque in india.
cuisine[edit]
the cuisine of thrissur is linked to its history, geography, demography and culture. rice is the staple food. achappam, kuzhalappam, vatteppam, unniyappam and pazham pori are common snacks. vellayappam, a kind of rice hopper is another dish which is special to the city, there have a food street named vellayappam angadi.
