tirunelveli
Education[edit]
education[edit]
tirunelveli medical college auditorium
during the 1790s, tamil christians established a number of schools in tirunelveli. the missionary educational system included primary and boarding schools, seminaries, industrial schools, orphanages and colleges. the first boarding school for girls was opened in 1821, but its efforts were hampered by the emphasis on christian education. thomas munro (1761–1827) of the british east india company established a two-tier school system: district schools, teaching law, and sub-district schools teaching vernacular languages in the madras presidency. tirunelveli had four sub-district schools: two teaching tamil and one each for telugu and persian.
tirunelveli city has 80 schools: 29 higher secondary schools, 12 high schools, 22 middle schools and 17 primary schools; the city corporation operates 33 of these schools. the city has eight arts and science colleges and six professional colleges. the manonmaniam sundaranar university is named for poet manonmaniam sundaranar, who wrote "tamil thai vazhthu" the state anthem. most christian schools and colleges in the city are located in the palayamkottai area.
anna university of technology tirunelveli was established in 2007, offering a variety of engineering and technology courses for undergraduate and graduate students. tirunelveli medical college, veterinary college and research institution, government law college, tirunelveli  and the government college of engineering, tirunelveli are professional colleges operated by the government of tamil nadu. the jesuit 'st. xavier's college' and st. john's college (operated by the church of south india diocese), mdt hindu college, sadakathulla appa college and sarah tucker college are notable arts colleges.
the indian institute of geomagnetism (iig) operates a regional unit, the equatorial geophysical research laboratory, conducting research in geomagnetism and atmospheric and space sciences. the city has a district science centre (a satellite unit of visvesvaraya industrial and technological museum, bangalore) with permanent exhibitions, science shows, interactive self-guided tours, a mini-planetarium and sky observation.
tirunelveli and the district have a high rate of child labour. the drop in female school attendance between ages 15 and 19 is almost four times greater than that in the rest of tamil nadu.
