tiruchirappalli
Education[edit]
education[edit]

main article: list of educational institutions in trichy
tiruchirappalli has been recognised in india as an important educational centre since the time of british rule. st. joseph's college, which opened in nagapattinam in 1846 and transferred to tiruchirappalli in 1883, is one of the oldest educational institutions in south india. the society for the propagation of the gospel (spg) college, established in 1883, is a premium missionary institution in the city.
india's second nobel laureate, c. v. raman, was born in tiruchirappalli.
as of 2013, tiruchirappalli has 45 arts and science colleges, 40 polytechnic colleges and 13 colleges that offer management education. national institute of technology, tiruchirappalli is located in a area of 800 acres. national institutional ranking framework ranked this nit the first among other others in india. the st. joseph's college, national college, bishop heber college, jamal mohamed college and the government law college are prominent colleges providing higher education in the arts and sciences. there are approximately 35 engineering colleges in and around the city. the national institute of technology, tiruchirappalli established by the government in 1964 as the regional engineering college, has a campus at thuvakudi on the outskirts of tiruchirappalli.
the anbil dharmalingam agricultural college and research institute was established as a constituent college of tamil nadu agricultural university in 1989, and the national research centre for banana offer higher education and research in agriculture. the tiruchirappalli branch of anna university was established after the bifurcation of anna university in 2007. 64 self-financing colleges which offer courses in engineering, architecture, management and computer applications in the districts of ariyalur, cuddalore, nagapattinam, perambalur, pudukkottai, thanjavur and tiruvarur are affiliated to anna university. the srm group of colleges established the srm institute of science and technology at irungalur near tiruchirappalli; this was followed by chennai medical college and hospital in 2007. a proposal by the group to include the institutions in srm university is under review by the ministry of human resources development of the government of india.
the bharathidasan university was established in tiruchirappalli in 1982 and controls 104 colleges in tiruchirappalli district and seven neighbouring districts. the university also runs a management school, the bharathidasan institute of management in the city in collaboration with bhel. the indian institute of management tiruchirappalli was set up during the eleventh five-year plan, along with five other iims opened during the 2011–12 academic season. in 2013, the ministry of human resource development (mhrd) approved indian institute of information technology (iiit), and the tamil nadu national law school, modelled on the national law school of india university, both started their operations in the city. the city is also the regional headquarters of the dakshina bharat hindi prachar sabha for the state of tamil nadu.
there are 200 higher secondary schools in tiruchirappalli; notable ones are the st. johns vestry anglo indian higher secondary school, campion anglo-indian higher secondary school, st joseph's anglo indian girls higher secondary school, railway mixed higher secondary school, higher secondary school for boys, srirangam and rsk higher secondary school.
notable people who were either born or educated at tiruchirappalli include c. v. raman, a. p. j. abdul kalam, sujatha, vaali, g. n. ramachandran, and former president of india r. venkataraman.
