tiruchirappalli
Utility services[edit]
utility services[edit]
electricity supply to the city is regulated and distributed by the tamil nadu electricity board (tneb). tiruchirappalli is the headquarters of the trichy region of tneb. the city and its suburbs form the trichy metro electricity distribution circle, which is subdivided into six divisions. a chief distribution engineer is stationed at the regional headquarters at tennur. water supply is provided by the tiruchirappalli city corporation. the city gets its drinking water supply from the kaveri river and 1,470 bore wells linked to 60 service reservoirs in and around the city. four of the six head works from which the city gets its water supply are maintained by the municipal corporation and the rest by other agencies.
pollution has been a major concern in tiruchirappalli. the tamil nadu pollution control board has set up five stations in the city to check the quality of air. as of 2012, about 432 tonnes (432,000 kg) of solid waste are produced in the city every day. solid waste management in the city is handled by the corporation; places such as the gandhi market, central bus terminus and the chathram bus terminus are being monitored by other agencies. the principal landfill is at ariyamangalam. waste water management in the trichy-srirangam underground drainage (ugd) areas is handled by the tamil nadu water supply and drainage board (twad) and in other areas by the tiruchirappalli municipal corporation. as of 2013, there were a total of 40,580 ugd connections maintained by the municipal corporation. in 2020, it is estimated that 31% of the city is covered under a networked sewage system, however, as of september 2020 the corporation has fast-tracked its project to cover the entire city, funded jointly by urban local body, tamil nadu urban finance and infrastructure development corporation ltd (tufidco) and asian development bank. the high toxicity of the waste water released by the trichy distilleries and chemicals limited (tdcl) is a major cause of concern for the corporation. the corporation's annual expenditure for the year 2010–11 was estimated to be ₹1,559.4 million (equivalent to ₹2.7 billion or us$34 million in 2020). in 2013, researchers from bharathidasan university assessed water quality in the tiruchirappalli area and concluded that although the quality of the groundwater was suitable for human consumption, the quality of the pond water in the city was "not fit for human usage, agricultural or industrial purposes".
under the national urban sanitation policy, tiruchirappalli was ranked sixth in india and first in tamil nadu on the basis of sanitation for the year 2009–10. in january 2010, tiruchirappalli became the first city in india where open defecation was prevented in all its slums. in a 2016 survey conducted by the ministry of urban development, as a part of the swachh bharat abhiyan campaign, tiruchirappalli was ranked third in the list of cleanest cities in india.
under the ease of living index 2018 published by the ministry of housing and urban affairs, tiruchirappalli was ranked twelfth in india and first in tamil nadu among the 111 cities considered. the ranking framework was categorised into four pillars, namely institutional, social, economic and physical, which comprised 78 indicators such as urban transport, waste water management, solid waste management and governance.
tiruchirappalli comes under the tiruchi telecom district of the bharat sanchar nigam limited (bsnl), india's state-owned telecom and internet services provider. there are about 20,000 business telephone subscribers in the city. both global system for mobile communications (gsm) and code division multiple access (cdma) mobile services are available. bsnl also provides broadband internet services. bsnl began offering wireless internet services with the commencement of evolution-data optimized (evdo) transmission in 2008. tiruchirappalli is one of the few cities in india where bsnl's caller line identification (cli)-based internet service netone is available. softnet (stpi), tata vsnl, bharti and reliance are other major broadband internet service providers in the city.
tiruchirappalli has a regional passport office, the second in tamil nadu, which commenced its operations on 23 march 1983 bifurcated from chennai region. after coimbatore and madurai regional office were established in late 2000s by bifurcating from trichy region, currently the office caters to the needs of trichy and seven adjacent districts namely, karur, nagappattinam, perambalur, pudukkottai, thanjavur, ariyalur and tiruvarur.
