tiruchirappalli
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in tiruchirappalli
check-in counters at the integrated terminal of tiruchirappalli international airport.
madurai-chennai tejas express at trichy junction
the most commonly used modes of local transport in tiruchirappalli are the state government-owned tamil nadu state transport corporation (tnstc) buses, and auto rickshaws. tiruchirappalli forms a part of the kumbakonam division of the tnstc. the city has two major bus termini; chatram bus stand and central bus stand, both of which operate intercity services and local transport to suburban areas.
tiruchirappalli sits at the junction of two major national highways—nh 45 and nh 67. nh 45 is one of the most congested highways in south india and carries almost 10,000 lorries on the tiruchirappalli–chennai stretch every night. other national highways originating in the city are nh 45b, nh 210 and nh 227. state highways that start from the city include sh 25 and sh 62. tiruchirappalli has 715.85 km (444.81 mi) of road maintained by the municipal corporation. a semi-ring road connecting all the national highways is being constructed to ease traffic congestion in the city. as of 2013, approximately 328,000 two-wheelers, 93,500 cars and 10,000 public transport vehicles operate within the city limits, apart from the 1,500 inter-city buses that pass through tiruchirappalli daily. tiruchirappalli suffers from traffic congestion mainly because of its narrow roads and absence of an integrated bus station.
passenger trains also carry a significant number of passengers from nearby towns. the great southern of india railway company was established in 1853 with its headquarters at england. in 1859, the company constructed its first railway line connecting tiruchirappalli and nagapattinam. the company merged with the carnatic railway company in 1874 to form the south indian railway company with tiruchirappalli as its headquarters. the city retained the position until 1908 when the company's headquarters was transferred to madras. tiruchirappalli junction is one of the busiest in india. it constitutes a separate division of the southern railway. tiruchirappalli has rail connectivity with most important cities and towns in india. other railway stations in the city include tiruchirappalli fort, tiruchirappalli town, srirangam, tiruchirappalli palakkarai and golden rock (ponmalai).
tiruchirappalli is served by tiruchirappalli international airport (iata: trz, icao: votr), 5 km (3.1 mi) from the city centre. the airport handles fivefold more international air traffic than domestic services, making it the only airport in india with this huge variation. it serves as a gateway to immigrants from south-east asian countries there are regular flights to chennai, mumbai, delhi, bangalore, hyderabad, colombo, dubai, kuala lumpur, and singapore. the airport handled more than 1 million passengers and 2012 tonnes of cargo during the fiscal year 2013–14.
