tirunelveli
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
inscriptions from the eighth to the 14th centuries (during the rule of the pandyas, cholas and later tenkasi pandyas) indicate the growth of tirunelveli as a centre of economic growth which developed around the nellaiappar temple. the drier parts of the province also flourished during the rule of the vijayanagara kings. from 1550 until the early modern era, migration to the city from other parts of the state was common and the urban regions became hubs of manufacturing and commerce. tirunelveli was a strategic point, connecting the eastern and western parts of the peninsula, as well as a trading centre. records of sea and overland trade between 1700 and 1850 indicate close trading connections with sri lanka and kerala. during the 1840s, cotton produced in the region was in demand for british mills. the chief exports during british rule were cotton, jaggery, chillies, tobacco, palmyra fibre, salt, dried saltwater fish and cattle.
occupations in tirunelveli include service-sector activities such as administration, agricultural trading, tourism, banking, agro-machinery, cement manufacturing, information technology and educational services. in 1991, the tirunelveli region ranked second in the number of women workers. service sectors such as tourism have developed, due to a growth in religious tourism. tirunelveli has beedi and cement factories, tobacco companies, workshops for steel-based products and mills for cotton textiles, spinning and weaving; there are also small-scale industries, such as tanneries and brick kilns. the agricultural areas, hand-woven clothes and household industries contribute to the economic growth of the city. food-processing industries have developed since the late 1990s; at the district level, it is the foremost industrial segment. industries involving rice-making, blue-jelly metal manufacturing and jem power generating are located on the outskirts of the city. the major agricultural produces in the region are paddy and cotton. beedi production during the 1990s earned an annual revenue of ₹ 190 billion and a foreign exchange of ₹ 8 billion across the three districts of tirunelveli, tiruchirapalli and vellore.
tirunelveli is a major area for wind-power generation. most wind-power-generation units in tamil nadu are located in tirunelveli and kanyakumari districts. in 2005 they contributed 2036.9 mw to the state power-generation capacity. many private, multinational wind companies are located on the outskirts of the city. in june 2007 the tata group signed a memorandum of understanding with the state government to open a titanium dioxide plant, with an estimated value of ₹ 25 billion, in tirunelveli district and thoothukudi district. however, the state government put the project on hold after increasing protests against it.
tirunelveli has two special economic zones in the outskirts of the city, one located in gangaikondan in the north along nh 44 and another one located in nanguneri in south along nh 44. they house several mncs such as atos syntel, coca-cola, yokohama rubber company, indian oil corporation limited, novo carbon private limited, bosch limited, alliance tyre group, ramco cements, india cements, and the like.
tech park is new it park recently established in palayamkottai .
