tiruchirappalli
Landmarks[edit]
landmarks[edit]
the "vellai gopuram" (white tower) on the eastern entrance of the srirangam temple named after a devadasi
once a part of the chola kingdom, tiruchirappalli has a number of exquisitely sculpted temples and fortresses.
the erumbeeswarar temple has been designated a protected monument by the archaeological survey of india.
most of the temples, including the rockfort temples, the ranganathaswamy temple at srirangam, the jambukeswarar temple at thiruvanaikkaval, the samayapuram mariamman temple, the erumbeeswarar temple, gneeliwaneswarar temple at thiruppaingneeli and the temples in urayur, are built in the dravidian style of architecture; the ranganathaswamy temple and jambukeswarar temple are often counted among the best examples of this style. the rock-cut cave temples of the rockfort, along with the gateway and the erumbeeswarar temple, are listed as monuments of national importance by the archaeological survey of india.
night view of trichy from the top of rockfort, photographed from the temple window.
considered one of the symbols of tiruchirappalli, the rockfort is a fortress which stands atop a 273-foot-high rock. it consists of a set of monolithic rocks accommodating many rock-cut cave temples. originally built by the pallavas, it was later reconstructed by the madurai nayaks and vijayanagara rulers. the temple complex has three shrines, two of which are dedicated to lord ganesha, one at the foot and the ucchi pillayar temple at the top, and the thayumanavar temple between them. the thayumanavar temple, the largest of the three, houses a shrine for pārvatī as well as the main deity. as per a legend, vayu bhaghvan and adiseshan had a dispute to find out who is superior, to prove the superiority adiseshan encircled the kailasam, vayu tried to remove this encircle by creating santamarutham (twister). because of the santamarutham, eight kodumudigal (parts) fell from kailasam into eight different places which are thirugonamalai (trincomalee, sri lanka), thirukalahasti, thiruchiramalai (rock fort), thiruenkoimalai, rajathagiri, neerthagiri, ratnagiri, and swethagiri thirupangeeli.
the rockfort is visible from almost every part of the city's north. the teppakulam at the foot of the rockfort is surrounded by bazaars. it has a mandapa at its centre.
the ranganathaswamy temple, dedicated to the hindu god vishnu, is located on the island of srirangam. often cited as the largest functioning hindu temple in the world, it has a perimeter of 4,116 metres (13,504 ft) and occupies 156 acres (630,000 m). considered to be among the 108 divya desams (holy shrines of lord vishnu), the temple is believed to house the mortal remains of the vaishnavite saint and philosopher ramanujacharya. originally built by the cholas, the temple was later renovated by the pandyas, the hoysalas, the madurai nayaks and the vijayanagar empire between the 9th and 16th centuries ad. there are 21 gopurams (towers), of which the rajagopuram is 236 feet (72 m). according to the limca book of records, it was the tallest temple tower in the world until 1999.
st. mary's cathedral
the jambukeswarar temple at thiruvanaikkaval and the erumbeeswarar temple at thiruverumbur were built in the rule of the medieval cholas.  the jambukeswarar temple is one of the pancha bhoota stalams dedicated to lord shiva; it is the fifth largest temple complex in tamil nadu. the city's best known mosque is the nadir shah mosque. the christ church constructed by the german protestant missionary christian friedrich schwarz in 1766 and the our lady of lourdes church are noted examples of gothic revival architecture in the city.
tropical butterfly conservatory
the chokkanatha nayak palace, which houses the rani mangammal mahal, was built by the madurai nayaks in the 17th century; it has now been converted into a museum. the nawab's palace,  the railway heritage centre, the upper anaicut constructed by sir arthur cotton, and the world's oldest functional dam, the grand anaicut, are some of the other important structures in tiruchirappalli.
