tiruchirappalli
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]

see also: tamil culture and tamil cuisine
a jallikattu match
a resident of tiruchirappalli is generally referred to as a tiruchiite. situated at the edge of the kaveri delta, the culture of tiruchirappalli is predominantly brahminical, prevalent elsewhere in the delta. with a substantial population of students and migrant industrial workers from different parts of india, tiruchirappalli has a more cosmopolitan outlook than the surrounding countryside. the main festival celebrated in tiruchirappalli is pongal, a regional harvest festival celebrated during january. as part of the pongal celebrations, jallikattu, a bull-taming village sport played on the last day of the festival, is occasionally held on the outskirts of the city. aadi perukku, samayapuram flower festival, vaikunta ekadasi, srirangam car festival, and the teppakulam float festival are some of the prominent festivals that are held locally. bakrid and eid al-fitr are also widely celebrated, owing to the substantial number of muslims in the city. nationwide festivals such as the gregorian new year, christmas, deepavali and holi are also celebrated in tiruchirappalli.
the 12th century tamil epic kambaramayanam was first recited at the ranganathaswamy temple in srirangam. in 1771, rama natakam, a musical drama written arunachala kavi and based on the ramayana,  was also performed there. tiruchirappalli was home to some of the prominent carnatic musicians—including lalgudi jayaraman, srirangam kannan and a. k. c. natarajan—and scholars such as t. s. murugesan pillai, kundalam rangachariar and k. a. p. viswanatham. composers, poets and vocalists such as g. ramanathan, t. k. ramamoorthy, vaali and p. madhuri, who have made significant contributions to tamil film music hail from the city.
textile weaving, leather-work and gem cutting are some of the important crafts practised in tiruchirappalli. wooden idols of hindu gods and goddesses are sold at poompuhar, the crafts emporium run by the government of tamil nadu. the trichy travel federation (ttf) was formed on 5 may 2009 to promote tiruchirappalli as a favourable tourist destination. the federation organises an annual food festival called suvai. lack of infrastructure has been a major deterrent to the city's tourism industry.
