tirunelveli
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]

see also: temples of tirunelveli
nellaiappar temple is a hindu temple dedicated to shiva in the form of nellaiappar. the deity is revered in the verses of tevaram, a seventh-century saiva work by sambandar. the temple was greatly expanded during the 16th-century nayak period and has a number of architectural attractions, including musical pillars. the temple has several festivals, the foremost an annual festival when the temple chariot is brought around the streets near the temple. it is one of the pancha sabhai temples, the five royal courts of nataraja (the dancing form of shiva), where he performed a cosmic dance. the nataraja shrine in the temple represents copper, and features many copper sculptures. tirunelveli has its fair share of temples, dating back to ancient times. it also prides itself as being the site where the nellaiappar temple is located
tirunelveli is also known for halwa, a sweet made of wheat, sugar and ghee. it originated during the mid-1800s at lakshmi vilas stores, which still exist. the art of sweet-making spread to other parts of tamil nadu, such as nagercoil, srivilliputhur and thoothukudi. tirunelveli halwa was popularised by iruttukadai halwa, a shop opened in 1900 which sells the sweets only during twilight.
central theatre, tirunelveli
tirunelveli has a number of cinemas which predominantly play tamil movies. it is among the 40 cities in india with fm radio stations. tirunelveli's stations are tirunelveli vanoli nilayam (all india radio, from the government of india), suryan fm (operated by sun network on 93.5 mhz) and hello fm (operated by the malai malar group on 106.4 mhz).
a number of state- and national-level sports events are sponsored in tirunelveli annually. the voc grounds (in central palayamkottai) and the anna stadium (on st. thomas road) are popular venues in the city, and some events are held at scholastic sports facilities. as in india generally, the most popular sport is cricket. also popular are football, volleyball, swimming and hockey, played on facilities provided by the tirunelveli division of the sports development authority of tamil nadu.
the government exhibition, an annual event at exhibition grounds, attracts thousands of visitors from in and around tirunelveli. the district science center - tirunelveli is in the centre of the city. near the city are regional tourist attractions such as the manimuthar and papanasam dams, the ariakulam and koonthakulam bird sanctuaries, manjolai and upper kodaiyar.
