tirunelveli
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in tirunelveli
entrance to mgr bus stand from nh7. jan '22
tirunelveli railway junction. nov '11
tirunelveli has an extensive transport network and is well-connected to other major cities by road, rail and air. the corporation maintains a total of 763.3 km (474.3 mi) of roads. the city has 134.88 km (83.81 mi) of concrete roads, 375.51 km (233.33 mi) of bt roads, 94.291 km (58.590 mi) of water-bound macadam roads, 76.31 km (47.42 mi) of unpaved roads and 82.3 km (51.1 mi) of highways. twenty-two kilometres (fourteen miles) of highway are maintained by the state highways department and thirty kilometres (nineteen miles) by the national highways department. in 1844, a bridge was built by colonel horsley across the tamirabarani river, connecting tirunelveli to palayamkottai. the city is located on nh 44, 150 km (93 mi) south of madurai and 91 km (57 mi) north of kanyakumari. nh 138 connects palayamkottai with tuticorin port. tirunelveli is also connected by major highways to kollam, tiruchendur, rajapalayam, sankarankovil, ambasamudram and nazareth.
the main bus stand (popularly known as the new bus stand), opened in 2003, is located in veinthaankulam and there is regular bus service to and from the city.  the main bus stand has been developed under the smart city projects at a total cost of rs. 50.72 crores (500.72 million).  renamed as the bharat ratna dr. mgr bus stand, it was inaugurated by chief minister m.k. stalin on 8 december 2021 through video conferencing. the other bus stands (for intracity services) are the junction and palay bus stands. the tamil nadu state transport corporation has daily services to a number of cities, and the corporation operates a computerised reservation centre in the main bus stand. it also operates local buses serving the city and neighbouring villages. the periyar bus stand commonly known as the old bus stand is fully demolished and a new bus station will be built under smart city plan. the state express transport corporation has intercity services to bangalore, chennai, kanyakumari, trivandrum and other cities.
tirunelveli junction railway station is one of the oldest railway stations in india. the line from tirunelveli to sengottai was opened in 1903; the connection to quilon, which was completed later, was the most important trade route to travancore province in british india. the city is connected to major cities in all four directions: madurai and sankarankovil to the north, nagercoil and trivandrum to the south, sengottai and kollam to the west and tiruchendur to the east. tirunelveli is also connected to major indian cities with daily services to chennai, coimbatore, tiruchirappalli, madurai, kanyakumari, salem, tirupati, bangalore, hyderabad, mangalore, ernakulam, trivandrum, mumbai, guruvayur, kolkata, jabalpur, varanasi, delhi, jammu, kollam, palghat and ahmedabad. there are daily passenger services to tuticorin, madurai, tiruchendur, tiruchirapalli, coimbatore, mayiladuthurai, nagercoil, palghat and kollam.
the nearest airport to tirunelveli is tuticorin airport (tcr) at vaagaikulam in thoothukkudi district, 22 km (14 mi) east of the city, which offers daily flights to chennai and bangalore. the nearest international airports are madurai international airport, 150 km (93 mi) away and thiruvananthapuram international airport (trv), about 130 km (81 mi) away.
