udaipur
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]
udaipur's lake palace at dusk
jharmar kotra national geological monument[edit]
jharmar kotra stromatolite fossil park at jharmar kotra south-east of udaipur has been declared the national geological monuments of india by the geological survey of india (gsi), for their protection, maintenance, promotion and enhancement of geotourism.
gossan in rajpura-dariba mineralised belt[edit]
gossan in rajpura-dariba mineralised belt nearby, consisting of gossan, has been declared the national geological monuments of india by the geological survey of india (gsi), for their protection, maintenance, promotion and enhancement of geotourism.
topography[edit]
the city palace alongside lake pichola.
udaipur is located at  wikiminiatlas24°31′30″n 73°40′38″e﻿ / ﻿24.525049°n 73.677116°e﻿ / 24.525049; 73.677116. the city covers an area of 64 km (25 sq mi) and lies at an altitude of 598.00 m (1,962 ft) above sea level. it is located in the southern region of rajasthan, near the gujarat border. the city lies 403 km (250 mi) southwest of the state capital, jaipur and 250 km (155 mi) northeast from ahmedabad.
udaipur with its lakes lies on the south slope of the aravalli range in rajasthan. the northern part of the district consists generally of elevated plateaus, while the eastern part has vast stretches of fertile plains. the southern part is covered with rocks, hills and dense forest. there are two important passages in the aravali ranges viz. desuri nal and saoke which serves as a link between udaipur and jodhpur district.
the lakes of the city being interconnected form a lake system which supports and sustains the groundwater recharge, water availability for drinking, agriculture, industries and is a source of employment through tourism. the lake system has three main lakes in its upper catchment area, six lakes within its municipal boundary and one lake in the downstream. the udaipur lake system, arising out of the river berach (banas basin) and its tributaries, is an integral component of the upper berach basin. the upper berach basin is a part of the gangetic river system, wherein the river berach meets river ganga through the rivers banas, chambal and yamuna.
the udaipur lake system can be divided into the following categories:
upper lakes: lake badi, chhota madar and bada madar city lakes: lake pichola, fateh sagar lake, swaroop sagar lake, rang sagar, kumharia talab, goverdhan sagar. downstream lake: udaisagar lake river: ayad river
maharana fateh singh (1884–1930) of udaipur, on a royal barge, in lake pichola.       view of a fateh sagar lake from a distance.       a view of udaipur from city palace, udaipur.       view of udaipur as seen from the city palace
