udaipur
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
the durbar hall, fateh prakash palace hotel
udaipur has a diversified economic base. the major contributions to the city's economy come from tourism, agriculture and mineral industries. the handicraft and cottage industry sectors play an important part in contributing to the growing economy. the city has also been included under the smart cities mission initiated by the government of india, and is selected in the list of first 20 cities to be developed as smart cities. in the 2001 census of india, 36% of udaipur resident was reported to be meaningfully employed.
handicrafts
udaipur is well known for handicrafts such as paintings, marble articles, silver arts and terracotta. the shilpgram is a platform where regional handicraft and hand-loom products are developed. craft bazaars are organised by the shilpgram, with an aim to encourage the regional arts and crafts, the handicraft and hand-loom works.
tourism
aerial view of city palace on lake pichola
farming lands amongst the aravali hills
udaipur, with its lakes, and historic palaces and architecture, is a major destination for tourists, both domestic and foreign nationals visiting the state. over 1.4 million tourists visited udaipur in 2016. with numerous hotels to serve visiting tourists, udaipur is home to some of the country's most popular luxury hotels and resorts. the oberoi udaivilas has been ranked as the world's number 1 hotel in 2015. the taj lake palace and the leela palace udaipur are also amongst the most expensive hotels in the country. with various other renowned hotel chains present in the city, the tourism sector has been a fairly large contributor to the economic growth and fame of udaipur.
metals and minerals industries
udaipur district is particularly rich in mineral resources as a large variety of important minerals are found here. copper, lead, zinc and silver, industrial minerals like phosphate, asbestos, calcite, limestone, talc (soapstone), barites, wollastonite and marble are the major driving resources behind the industries based in the city. marble is exclusively mined, processed and exported from here around the world. the marble industry is well set and established with proper infrastructure and technological support for mining and processing. it is the largest sector giving employment to many people in the city and the immigrants from nearby areas. udaipur is also home to the world's second largest zinc producer, hindustan zinc.
electronics design and manufacturing[edit]
udaipur is host to medium and large enterprises designing and manufacturing electronic instruments, control panels, sensitive metering technology and led lamps. the electrical and electronics industry in udaipur employs over 6,000 people. these businesses are tempsens, pyrotech and secure meters ltd. secure meter limited is one of the major meter manufacturers across the globe.
agriculture
agriculture as in most other parts of the country, remains a leading sector in the city's economy. the major crops of the area are maize and jowar in kharif season and wheat and mustard in the rabi season. pulses, groundnut and vegetables like brinjals are some of the major food products grown in the city. the maharana pratap university of agriculture and technology, along with its affiliated institutions, has been working towards identifying, designing, preparing and adapting new techniques in the field of production technology for agricultural development since its establishment.
