udaipur
Tourism[edit]
tourism[edit]

main article: tourist attractions in udaipur
list[edit]
picture attraction period description    city palace, udaipur 1559 standing on the east bank of lake pichola is a massive series of palaces built at different times from 1559. its main entrance is through the triple-arched gate - the tripolia, built in 1725. this gate leads to a series of courtyards, overlapping partitions, terraces, corridors and gardens. the palace now houses a museum with many antique articles, paintings, decorative furniture and utensils from the royal era.    lake palace 1743–1746 situated over an island in lake pichola, the lake palace was constructed to serve as a royal summer palace. built of white marble, the palace is now a luxury 5 star hotel, operating under the "taj hotels resorts and palaces" banner.    jag mandir 1551–1652 jag mandir is a palace built on an island in the lake pichola. also known as the "lake garden palace", it was constructed by three maharanas of the mewar kingdom. the construction started in 1551 and was completed by 1652. the royal family used the palace as a summer resort and pleasure palace.       kesariyaji temple  9th century   the temple is dedicated to lord rishabh dev, the first jain tirthankara. the fifty-two pinnacles of the temple are seen from a long distance. the main idol in the temple is of tirthankara rishabha, carved in black stone in padmasana posture, about 3.5 feet (1.1 m) tall.     monsoon palace - monsoon palace, also known as sajjan garh palace, was built as an astronomical center to keep track of the movement of monsoon clouds in the area and also served as the summer resort of the maharanas. built with white marble, it is located on bansdara peak of the aravalli hill range at an elevation of 944 m (3100 ft) above mean sea level. the palace has view of the city's lakes, palaces, and surrounding countryside.    jagdish temple 1651 the jagdish temple is a large hindu temple in the middle of udaipur, built by maharana jagat singh i. a key tourist place in the city, this temple is an example of māru-gurjara architecture.    fateh sagar lake 1678 lake fatehsagar is an artificial lake situated in the north-west part of udaipur. the lake was originally built by maharana jai singh and later reconstructed and extended by maharana fateh singh. it also houses an aquarium named 'under the sun' inaugurated in 2017.    sukhadia circle - sukhadia circle (square) is large roundabout in the city's northern suburb and is a recreational centre. the square has in its centre, a small pond amidst which lies a 21 ft high three-tiered fountain. the fountain, made of marble is surmounted by a wheat-ear motif, a symbol of prosperity.    saheliyon-ki-bari 1710–1734 sahelion ki bari is a garden and tourist space in the northern part of the city. the garden with its fountains and kiosks, a lotus pool and marble elephants, was laid for a group of forty-eight young women attendants who accompanied a princess to udaipur as part of her dowry.    lake pichola 1362 lake pichola is an artificial freshwater lake and is one of the several contiguous lakes in the city of udaipur. the lake's surroundings and the several islands within the lake have been developed over the centuries, with palaces, marble temples, family mansions, bathing ghats (gangaur ghat, ambrai ghat, hanuman ghat) and chabutaras (a raised platform, normally within a courtyard)    moti magri - moti magri or pearl hill, is a memorial of the rajput hero maharana pratap. it is basically a small hill, atop of which there is a bronze statue of the maharana astride his favourite horse "chetak". it was initiated by maharana bhagwat singh mewar, and carried over and completed with the help of public trust.     neemach mata temple  -  neemach mata is located on a hill near fateh sagar lake. the temple is 900 meters above on the top of the hill. this location provides a holistic view of entire udaipur.     karni mata, udaipur - karni mata temple is located at doodh talai near pichola. there is a rope-way which takes visitors to a hill at which this temple is located. there are views of pichola lake, jag mandir and doodh talai. from the top one can view the whole city.     pratap gaurav kendra  -  pratap gaurav kendra rashtriya tirtha is situated at tiger hill. it was started by the veer shromani maharana pratap samiti, and aims at providing information about maharana pratap and the historical heritage of the area with the help of modern technology.     gulab bagh and zoo  -  gulab bagh is the largest garden in udaipur, situated at heart of the city. it is known for a wide variety plantation and includes various attractions including ponds, a library, toy train, zoological park, temples and a religious place for arya samaj, as well as several government offices.     pratap park  2016  pratap park is a garden situated near the bank of pichola lake. it has an open gymnasium and several other attractions. it has gained attraction due to the human-sized alphabets reading "i love udaipur", with a view of lake pichola and city palace in the background.
