udaipur
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
wall painting at shilpgram, udaipur
mewari artist at work
udaipur has a rich cultural heritage from the past e.g. lakes, temples, huge forts, and palaces. the city has kept a balance between preserving the rituals and traditions of the past while keeping up with the modern advancements and changes in lifestyle{citation needed}. like any other place in the state of rajasthan, folk dance and music have an important place in adding to the city's cultural richness. the dynamic and vibrant dances of bhavai, ghoomar, kachchhi ghodi, kalbeliya, and terahtaali add a sparkle to the rich cultural heritage of udaipur.
ghoomar dance is a part of the hindu culture of the mewar region of rajasthan. this is a community dance for women and performed on auspicious occasions where the ladies move in circles. kalbelia, one of the most sensuous dance forms of rajasthan, is performed by the kalbeliya snake charmers' community with the sapera dancers wearing long, black skirts embroidered with silver ribbons. bhavai dance consists of veiled women dancers balancing up to seven or nine brass pitchers as they pirouette and then swaying with the soles of their feet on the top of a glass or on the edge of the sword kachchhi ghodi dance is performed on dummy horses where men in elaborate costumes ride the decorated dummy horses. holding swords, these dancers move to the beating of drums and fifes.
following a lineage of traditions and religious significance, the various dances complement the fairs and festivals held in the city.  the music consists mainly of the use of morchang, naad, tanpura, and sarangi, among many other instruments.
miniature paintings are amongst the most famous paintings developed under the patronage of the rulers of rajasthan. the simplest among these are done on walls, and through folk in style, they nevertheless have some of the flavors of frescoes one sees in the old palaces. the tradition of painting the wall of houses with scenes from mythological and chivalric tales has been prevalent in rajasthan for the past many centuries {citation needed}. the people of the city make use of such wall paintings for decorations during wedding celebrations. noted amongst the miniature style of paintings are particularly the pichvais, which are those made on cloth, and phad, made on cloth scroll in a folk style.
the bharatiya lok kala mandal is a cultural institution based in the city. the institute with its museum is a platform that displays a collection of rajasthani culture. offering an insight into the lifestyle of the royal era in udaipur, the museum has a collection of dresses, tribal jewelry, turbans, dolls, masks, musical instruments, paintings, and puppets. with various cultural events including folk song and dance performances, theatre and puppetry, the institute highlights the different social stigmas, thereby proving to be a powerful education tool for the masses.
festivals[edit]
gangaur festival[edit]
gangaur is one of the most important local hindu festivals in rajasthan. in some form or the other it is celebrated all over rajasthan. "gan" is a synonym for shiva and "gauri" or "gaur" stands for hindu goddess parvati, the wife of shiva. gangaur celebrates the marriage and is a symbol of conjugal and marital happiness.
it is celebrated in the month of chaitra (march–april), the first month of the hindu calendar. this month marks the end of winter and the onset of spring. this festival is celebrated by women, who worship clay idols of "gan" & "gauri" in their houses. these idols are worshiped by the girls who seek the blessings of gan and gauri for a good husband, while the married women pray for the good health and long life of their husbands. on the eve of the gangaur festival, women decorate their palms and fingers with henna. udaipur has a ghat named after gangaur. gangaur ghat or gangori ghat is situated on the waterfront of lake pichola. this ghat serves as a location for the celebration of some festivals, including the gangaur festival. the idols of gan and gauri are immersed in the lake pichola from this ghat.
a traditional procession of gangaur starts from the city palace which passes through the city. the procession is headed by old palanquins, chariots, bullock carts, and performance by folk artists.
shilpgram utsav[edit]
shilpgram, a crafts village 3  km west of lake fateh sagar, has displays of traditional houses from rajasthan, gujarat, goa, and maharashtra. there are also demonstrations by musicians, dancers, or artisans from these states. the 10-day festival organized here is a treat for the visitor to an array of exquisite art and craft. one of the important objectives of the shilpgram festival is in the sphere of increasing awareness and knowledge of rural life and crafts, specifically, for the younger generation. special emphasis is laid on workshops for children on arts, crafts, theatre, and music.
hariyali amavasya[edit]
hariyali amavasya (new moon day of the sawan / shravan month) marks the beginning of the monsoons and greenery. it arrives three days before the famous hartalika teej (shravan shukla tritiya). people worship god shiva for abundant rains and good agricultural season. melas and fests are arranged in several places in the city.
jagannath rath yatra[edit]
in udaipur, the third biggest ratha-yatra is organized on the auspicious day of ashadh shukla paksha (bright fortnight) dwitiya according to indian vikram samvat. on this cultural day of summer solstice theme, june 21 of every year, the journey of the hindu god jagannath to aunt's house is started. the presiding hindu gods of the temple jagannath (krishna), balabhadra (balarama) and their sister subhadra are taken through the streets in decorated wooden chariots, which are made annually. the chariot of hindu god jagannath, called nandighosha, has 16 wheels and is covered in red and yellow.
for many hindus, the sanctity of the festival is that a touch of the chariot or pulling ropes is considered to give the results of several pious actions or penance for ages.
jal-jhulni ekadashi[edit]
according to the hindu calendar, gyaras, or ekadashi is basically, the 11th day of each waxing (shukla paksha ) and waning moon (krishna paksha). this ekadashi, known as jal-jhulni gyaras, or jal-jhulni ekadashi, like all other festivals, is celebrated with enthusiasm.
