udaipur
city in rajasthan, india
this article is about the city in rajasthan. for tripura, see udaipur, tripura. for others, see udaipur (disambiguation).

city in rajasthan, india
udaipurcityfrom top to bottom: evening view of the city, city palace complex, monsoon palace, lake palace,  udaipur landscape, jag mandir, pratap gaurav kendra, udaipur skyline with lake pichola at dusknickname(s): "city of lakes" and the white cityudaipurlocation in rajasthan, indiaudaipurudaipur (rajasthan)show map of indiashow map of rajasthanshow allcoordinates: 24°35′n 73°41′e﻿ / ﻿24.58°n 73.68°e﻿ / 24.58; 73.68coordinates: 24°35′n 73°41′e﻿ / ﻿24.58°n 73.68°e﻿ / 24.58; 73.68country indiastaterajasthandistrictudaipurfounded byrana udai singh iigovernment • bodyudaipur municipal corporationarea • city64 km (25 sq mi)elevation423 m (1,388 ft)population (2011) • city451,100 • metro474,531languages • officialhindi, rajasthani • additionalenglish • regionalmewaritime zoneutc+5:30 (ist)pin313001- 313024telephone code+91- 294vehicle registrationrj-27 rj-58 (salumber)nearest citiesjodhpur, chittorgarh, kota, ahmedabad, jaipur, ajmer, indore, dungarpur, banswaraclimatebshwebsitewww.udaipur.rajasthan.gov.in
udaipur (pronunciation (help·info)) (iso 15919: udayapura), historically named as udayapura, is a city and municipal corporation in udaipur district of the state of rajasthan, india. it is the administrative headquarter of udaipur district. it is the historic capital of the kingdom of mewar in the  former rajputana agency. it was founded in 1559 by udai singh ii of the sisodia clan of rajput, when he shifted his capital from the city of chittorgarh to udaipur after chittorgarh was besieged by akbar. it remained as the capital city till 1818 when it became a british princely state, and thereafter the mewar province became a part of rajasthan when india gained independence in 1947.
the city is located in the southernmost part of rajasthan, near the gujarat border. it is surrounded by the aravali range, which separates it from the thar desert. it is placed almost in the middle of two major indian metro cities, around 660 km from delhi and 800 km from mumbai. besides, connectivity with gujarat ports provide udaipur a strategic geographical advantage. udaipur is well connected with nearby cities and states by means of road, rail and air transportation facilities. the city is served by the maharana pratap airport. common languages spoken include hindi, english and rajasthani (mewari).
dubbed "the most romantic spot on the continent of india" by british administrator james tod, udaipur is a tourist destination and is known for its history, culture, scenic locations and the rajput-era palaces. it is popularly known as the "city of lakes" because of its sophisticated lake system. it has seven lakes surrounding the city. five of the major lakes, namely fateh sagar lake, lake pichola, swaroop sagar lake, rangsagar, and doodh talai lake, have been included under the restoration project of the national lake conservation plan (nlcp) of the government of india. besides lakes, udaipur is also known for its historic forts and palaces, museums, galleries, natural locations and gardens, architectural temples, as well as traditional fairs, festivals and structures. due to the several lakes present here, it is sometimes dubbed "venice of the east". udaipur economy is primarily driven by tourism, though minerals, marble processing, chemical manufacturing and development, electronic manufacturing and the handicraft industry are also contributors. udaipur hosts several state and regional public offices, including offices of director of mines and geology, commissioner of excise, commissioner of tribal area development, hindustan zinc limited, and rajasthan state mines and mineral corporation limited. besides, udaipur is rising as educational hub as well, with 5 universities, 14 colleges and more than 160 high schools. udaipur is home to iim udaipur, the fifth best management institution in the country according to nirf ranking released by the mhrd.
