udaipur
History[edit]
history[edit]

main articles: udaipur state and history of udaipur
pre-historic era[edit]
panoramic view of old city of udaipur with city palace behind it.
the ahar river bank was inhabited in about 2000 bce. there are footprints of two different civilizations, which provides claims about earliest inhabitants of the ahar culture: the first ones are the bhil/bheels, the indigenous tribes originated at this place, and are still residing in the area in large numbers. the second footprints were of rajputs, who once entered the enclosed valley, and then continued to live in this place for centuries.
establishment as a city[edit]
statue of maharana pratap of mewar, commemorating the battle of haldighati.
udaipur was founded in 1559, by maharana udai singh ii in the fertile circular girwa valley to the southwest of nagda, on the banas river. the city was established as the new capital of the mewar kingdom. this area already had a thriving trading town, ayad, which had served as the capital of mewar in the 10th through 12th centuries. the girwa region was thus already well known to chittaud rulers who moved to it whenever the vulnerable tableland chittaurgarh was threatened with enemy attacks. rana udai singh ii, in the wake of 16th-century emergence of artillery warfare, decided during his exile at kumbhalgarh to move his capital to a more secure location. ayad was flood-prone, hence he chose the ridge east of pichola lake to start his new capital city, where he came upon a hermit while hunting in the foothills of the aravalli range. in the myth, the hermit blessed the king and guided him to build a palace on the spot, assuring him it would be well protected. udai singh ii consequently established a residence on the site. in november 1567, the mughal emperor akbar conquered chittor. to protect his territory from attack, rana udai singh built a six-kilometre-long city wall, with seven gates, namely surajpole, chandpole, udiapole, hathipole, ambapole, brahmpole, delhi gate, and kishanpole. the area within these walls and gates is still known as the old city or the walled city.
in september 1576, akbar himself arrived at udaipur and remained there for 6 months until may 1577. in 1615, rana amar singh accepted vassalship to mughal rule under emperor jahangir and udaipur remained the capital of the state, which became a princely state of british india in 1818. being a mountainous region and unsuitable for heavily armoured mughal horses, udaipur remained safe from mughal influence despite much pressure. {citation needed} at present, maharana mahendra singh mewar  is the 76th custodian of the mewar dynasty.
