udaipur
Sports[edit]
sports[edit]
popular sports include cricket, football, hockey, tennis, chess, badminton, archery, etc.
stadiums
gandhi ground is the main sports venue for various events, like athletics, basketball, field hockey, football, kho kho and volleyball. luv kush indoor stadium is generally used for the indoor sports especially badminton and tt. maharana bhupal stadium is a multi-purpose stadium used for organising matches of football, cricket and other sports. for encouraging sports in the city and even for encouraging international sports in the city, a step has been put forward by establishing 'khel gaon (village)'or maharana pratap khel gaon in chitrakoot nagar. it will be committed to 12 sports namely like basketball, volleyball, tennis, kho-kho, kabaddi, handball, archery, rifle shooting, judo – karate, boxing, swimming, squash.
udaipur international cricket stadium is a proposed cricket stadium in udaipur. in 2013, after a dispute between rajasthan state sports council and rajasthan cricket association over the availability of sawai mansingh stadium during the indian premier league, the rca decided to have plans of having their own stadium. rca has gained land in udaipur with 9.67 acres from the udaipur improvement trust on a 99-year lease and stadium will have a capacity of 35,000.
cricket
udaipur has several cricket clubs and is home to many state-level players. ashok menaria of udaipur has represented india in u-19 world cup. ashok menaria and dishant yagnik of the city have played in ipl for rajasthan royals.
chess
chess is a popular game in the city among both young and senior players. udaipur has over 120 international fide rated chess players. players from udaipur have represented rajasthan several times in different nationals such as arena grandmaster chandrajeet rajawat. chandrajeet rajawat has also won rajasthan state championship over seven times in different categories. udaipur also has top fide rated players of rajasthan recognized by aicf. udaipur is also a favourite destination for chess players. with many international chess events throughout the year, bringing more than 1500 players each year from all over the world to compete.
water sports
the city's lakes provide an opportunity for water sports. the nearby jaisamand lake, situated about 56 km from the city, is equipped with water sports facilities with a range of different boats available. kayaking and canoeing sports camps have also been started at the fateh sagar lake. the city also hosted the 2012 national kayaking and canoeing championship with fateh sagar lake serving as the venue.
powerlifting
the asian powerlifting championships 2016, organised by indian powerlifting federation, and sanctioned by asian powerlifting federation and international powerlifting federation, was held in udaipur from 7 june 2016 to 12 june 2016. the city also served as the venue for the asian powerlifting championships in 2012.
