udaipur
Udaipur in popular culture[edit]
udaipur in popular culture[edit]
udaipur was voted the best city in the world in 2009 by the travel + leisure magazine, and is now amongst the favourite wedding destinations for indian as well as foreign nationals. the city is a blend of sights, sounds and experiences, which have made it one of the top destinations for weddings and celebrations.
movies and television
udaipur is mentioned under the spelling oodeypore in rudyard kipling's the jungle book as the birthplace of bagheera, the fictional panther in the king's menagerie.
because of its scenic locations, udaipur has been the shooting location for many hollywood and bollywood movies. indian sections of the james bond film octopussy were filmed in the city, the lake palace, and the monsoon palace.  the nearby desert was the backdrop of the remarkable rescue of octopussy (maud adams) by bond (roger moore). some scenes from the british television series the jewel in the crown were also filmed in udaipur.  the disney channel film, the cheetah girls one world, was shot in udaipur in january 2008. some of the other non-indian movies and tv shows filmed in udaipur include: darjeeling limited, opening night, heat and dust, indische ring, inside octopussy, james bond in india, the best exotic marigold hotel, gandhi, and the fall. jag mandir, a documentary film directed for television by werner herzog in 1991, was also filmed in the city.
udaipur has been a location for a number of bollywood movies. some of them shot here include: dhadak, guide, mera saaya, phool bane angaray, kachche dhaage, mera gaon mera desh, jalmahal, yaadein, return of the thief of the bagdad, eklavya: the royal guard, dhamaal, jis desh mei ganga rehta hai, chalo ishq ladaaye, fiza, gaddaar, hum hain rahi pyar ke, khuda gawah, kundan, nandini, saajan ka ghar, yeh jawaani hai deewani, pataakha, mirzya, goliyon ki raasleela ram-leela, prem ratan dhan payo, love aaj kal, angrezi medium. udaipur is also the setting of various television series like yeh rishta kya kehlata hai, rakhi ka swayamwar and bharat ka veer putra – maharana pratap.
events
udaipur is a destination for organising various national and international cultural events. recently, udaipur hosted the first edition of india's first world music festival, a two-day festival held on 13 and 14 february 2016. performances were made by artists and musicians from more than 12 countries, including spain, ghana, venezuela, italy, france as well as india. udaipur is also the host for the udaipur lake festival, a cultural event organized by the udaipur municipal corporation. in this festival, musical programs, adventure sports, jungle safari, bird watching, light and sound shows, art fair etc. are held around the lakes during the three to four day period.
udaipur is also the host city for the first asean art camp being organised by the union ministry of external affairs from september 21–29. there are total of 10 countries included and are taking part in the event: indonesia, singapore, malaysia, philippines, brunei, thailand, cambodia, myanmar, vietnam, and india. this 10-day long art camp acts as a platform for cultural and artistic exchange among the participating countries.
