udaipur
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
udaipur is well connected to the major cities of india by land, rail, and air.
maharana pratap airport
air
maharana pratap airport, is a small domestic airport situated in a satellite town about 20 kilometres from udaipur. daily flights connect udaipur with jaipur, mumbai,  delhi, chennai, aurangabad, bangalore,  hyderabad, surat and varanasi . air india, indigo and spice jet are operational at present. the airport having just three boarding gates, gate 1 is on the ground floor while gates 2 & 3 are at the first floor, and only ten check-in counters can barely handle 600 passengers at a time. the airport has been renovated by the airport authority of india for a though remote but possible international airport status.
rail
udaipur city railway station and rana pratap nagar railway station are two railway stations in udaipur. through them, udaipur has direct train connectivity on the broad gauge network to most of the major cities in rajasthan and the rest of india such as mysuru, bengaluru, khajuraho, alwar, jaipur, kota, chittorgarh, ajmer, delhi, mumbai, kolkata, ratlam, indore, ujjain, mumbai, surat, vadodara, gwalior and agra and a broad gauge conversion is going on to ahmedabad. luxurious trains, the palace on wheels, royal rajasthan on wheels, maharaja express and the indian maharaja have udaipur as the scheduled stop on their itinerary. trains connecting udaipur with the capital of india, delhi include the mewar express and chetak express.
road
the city lies on the intersection point of east west corridor, golden quadrilateral, national highway (nh) 76 and national highway (nh) 8, midway between delhi and mumbai, located around 700 kilometres from either city. the east west corridor which starts from porbandar and ends at silchar is intersecting the golden quadrilateral and shares the common space from udaipur to chittor. the roads in this part of the country are paved and fit for private vehicles. one can either drive from jaipur (around 6 hours), ahmedabad (4.1/2 hours) or surat (9 hours) on nh 8 or golden quadrilateral, from kota (3 hours - ew corridor or nh 76). udaipur city bus depot has lines running for the majority of other destinations in rajasthan and farther north and west towards madhya pradesh and gujarat. apart from rajasthan state road transport corporation (rsrtc), there are numerous private operators and companies providing bus services to and from the other cities.
local transport
unmetered taxis, private taxi, radio taxi, auto rickshaws, and regular city bus services are available in the city. since 2015 uber and ola cab services are available.
udaipur panorama from jag mandir island
