udupi
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]
udupi is becoming a major town in karnataka. udupi is the birthplace of the syndicate bank, corporation bank and harsha retail, the leading retailer of coastal karnataka. udupi's economy also consists of agriculture and fishing. small-scale industries like the cashew industry, and other food industries and milk cooperatives are the most prominent. recently, udupi is also making its mark in the real estate industry, greatly influenced by its neighboring spearhead mangalore.
the karnataka government had signed a memorandum of understanding (mou) with the cogentrix light and power industry to set up a thermal power plant in the district at nandikur. however, because of stiff opposition from citizens and environmentalist groups, the project has been temporarily suspended. an attempt by the nagarjuna power corporation to set up a similar plant at nearby padubidri also met strong opposition. now, the power plant has been set up, generating 1,200 mw of power under the name of udupi power corporation limited (upcl), a subsidiary of lanco infra, an andhra pradesh-based infrastructure major. adani power has taken over from lanco infra in 2014 for a sum of rs 6,000 crores. the opposition, however, continues.
manipal, a suburb of udupi, is home to the headquarters of syndicate bank. it is renowned as an education and medical hub. kasturba medical college and mit (manipal institute of technology) are situated here.
tebma shipyards ltd is located in malpe harbour complex. it is involved in building multipurpose platform supply vessels (mpsvs), platform supply vessel, geotechnical research vessel, dredgers and tugs for indian as well as export markets.
udupi has a local handloom sari industry. made of pure cotton and lightweight, the sari has art silk design on its border and pallu besides butta of art silk dotting it. hard work, low returns, and competition from power loom has led to a drop in the number of weavers of nearly 95% over three decades. a geographical indication tag for udupi sarees is under examination with the geographical indications registry of india.
