ujjain
Transportation[edit]
transportation[edit]
airport[edit]
ujjain does not have any airport but has an airstrip on dewas road which is used for air transport purposes. in 2013, the government of madhya pradesh started a ujjain-bhopal air services as a joint venture with ventura airconnect. due to very low booking, the ambitious project was scrapped. the main reason for the failure of the plan was due to improper timing of flights. the nearest airport is the devi ahilyabai holkar international airport at indore (57 km).
railway[edit]
ujjain station
ujjain junction is the main railway station of ujjain, and it is directly or indirectly well-connected to all the major railway stations in india. it lies on the ratlam–bhopal, indore–nagda and guna–khandwa route. to the west it is connected to ratlam junction, to the north it is connected with nagda junction, to the east it is connected with maksi junction, bhopal junction, and to the south it is connected to indore junction bg, dewas junction harda bg.
c&w training centre/ujjain/wr
there are six railway stations in the ujjain city and its suburbs:
station name  station code  railway zone  total platforms   ujjain junction  ujn  western railway  08   chintaman ganesh  cnn  western railway  02   matana buzurg  mabg  western railway  02   pingleshwar  plw  western railway  02   vikramnagar  vrg  western railway  03   tajpur  tjp  western railway  02
road[edit]
ujjain-indore highway
dewas gate stand and nana kheda bus stand are the two bus stands in the city that provide service to destinations located in the states. a large number of state run private buses are available for ahmedabad, jaipur, ajmer, khajuraho, harda, indore, bhopal, pune, mumbai, kota, mandu, jhalawar and various other locations. the city has a well connected road network including indore road, badnagar road, dewas road, agar road, nagda road and maksi road. there are three national highways; 47 connects to ahmedabad, proposed 148ng connects to garoth and 552g connects to indore.
other regional highways passing through the city are:
indore – ujjain road via sh 27 part of nh 552g kota / agar – ujjain road via nh 552g bhopal / dewas – ujjain road via sh 18 now nh 148ng ratlam / barnagar – ujjain road via sh 18 now nh jaora / nimach – ujjain road via sh 17 maksi – ujjain road (connects to nh 3) harda - ujjain road (connects to via national highway 59a nh 47) and sh 18 ujjain - garoth proposed new green field four lane national highway no nh 148ng
local transport[edit]
ujjain depends on an extensive network of auto rickshaws, city busses, private taxis and tata magic, that operate throughout the city, connecting one part with another. umc has recently introduced city buses with a public private partnership project as the city was identified urban agglomerations with less than 1 million population under the jawaharlal nehru national urban renewal mission.
