unnao
History[edit]
history[edit]
the district is named after its capital, unnao. about 900 years ago, the site of this town was covered with extensive forests. godo singh, a chauhan rajput, cleared the forests probably in the third quarter of the 12th century and founded a town, called sawai godo, which shortly afterwards passed into the hands of the rulers of the kannauj, who appointed khande singh as the governor of the place. unwant rai singh, a bisen rajput and a lieutenant of the governor, killed him and built a fort here, renaming the place as unnao after himself.
in ancient times, the area which comprises unnao formed part of the kosala mahajanapada. it was later included in oudh. this region has been inhabited since antiquity as traces from ancient times remain at some places in the district. after the first war of indian independence in 1857, power was transferred from the british east india company to the british crown, by the queen's proclamation of 1858. once the order was restored, the civil administration was re-established in the district which was named unnao, with headquarters at unnao. it assumed its present size in 1869. the same year the town of unnao was constituted a municipality. there were many rulers with a small estates ruled under the constituency of unnao proclaimed by british constituency during early 1900s till 1948 until india has been handed over to the interim government of 1948. later, in 1956 the local throne was handed over to pahadpur estate, one of the strongest estates in unnao and had been ruled under rao shivbali singh bahadur chauhan, who had served his country as a royal indian army personnel in british rule. later, in 1970s the custody of unnao had been succeeded by his descendant and his very own son rao ramsajeevan singh bahadur chauhan, who also had served his country in royal indian army. he is blessed with 5 children, 2 daughters and 3 sons and had married to the daughter of raja bahadur singh of dalpatkheda estate. this history is in the unnao book.
