unnao
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
rail[edit]
unnao railway station
unnao is seamlessly connected through indian railways. unnao railway station is the junction point for rae bareli, unchahar, kunda harnamganj, prayag, allahabad, hardoi, balamau situated at lucknow-kanpur stretch. trains for major cities like agra, ahmedabad, bangalore, bhopal, nagpur, vijaywada, chennai, coimbatore, palakkad,  bhubaneswar, bhadrak, cuttak, chennai, chandigarh, chitrakoot, cochin, delhi, gorakhpur, ernakulam, hyderabad, jaipur, jammu tawi, jhansi, jalandhar, amritsar, panipat, gorakhpur, gwalior, darbhanga, kota, mumbai, nagpur, patna, puri, surat, trivandrum, vadodara, ujjain, varanasi, vadodara,  can be boarded here. the railway stations in unnao urban agglomeration are:-
unnao railway station- this is the major junction railway station in the city of unnao and is connected to major cities of india with many express/mail trains. magarwara railway station-this is a passenger/emu train station in the industrial suburb of magarwara. sonik railway station-this is a railway station towards east of unnao city near upsidc industrial area and has only passenger/emu trains stoppage. kanpur bridge left bank station- this is a station within the municipal limits of shuklaganj, the twin city of unnao and has only passenger/emu stoppage.
kanpur lucknow high speed railway[edit]
unnao will be the only railway station between kanpur and lucknow of the planned high speed railways.
road[edit]
unnao bypass gate near nirala nagar
the major national highway nh 25 passes through unnao which has bypass from unnao.  the state highway which is 78 km encompasses unnao is in good condition. lucknow-agra expressway india's longest access-controlled expressway passes through unnao district. it is a six lane expressway. ganga expressway will also pass through unnao which will enhance connectivity with national capital.
air[edit]
the nearest airport is kanpur airport towards west (approx. 25 km) and lucknow airport towards east (approx. 50 km)
inner city transport[edit]
the city has transport likes auto-rickshaw and e-rickshaw (by-pass to tempo stand (kanpur),  pedal rickshaws and sub metropolitan city buses and economical cross overs like endeavour, scorpio, innova, bolero etc. which are privately run. kanpur metropolitan bus service has started operating fully air conditioned electric  buses from unnao taxi stand (gandhi nagar tiraha) to kanpur bada chauraha via magawara and shuklaganj which will help in fast transit from unnao to kanpur.
