vadodara
Economy
economy
in vadodara various large-scale industries such as gujarat refinery of indian oil corporation(iocl), gujarat state fertilizers & chemicals (gsfc), vadodara manufacturing division(vmd)(formerly ipcl) of reliance industries limited, deepak nitrite, parikh industries, linde engineering india and gujarat alkalies and chemicals limited (gacl) have come up in the vicinity of gujarat refinery. other large-scale public sector units are heavy water project, gujarat industries power company limited (gipcl), oil and natural gas corporation (ongc) & gas authority of india limited (gail). vadodara, is also manufacturing hub of power equipments, rail coaches and defense aircraft.
located in vadodara are over 35% of india's power transmission and distribution equipment manufacturers and an estimated 800 ancillaries supporting the big players in power sector equipment manufacturing and engineering industry. larsen & tourbo(l&t), has established “knowledge city” in vodadara. the l&t knowledge city is the hub of several key businesses of the l&t group. the power business, mid & downstream hydrocarbon, l&t technology services and the engineering joint venture l&t-sargent & lundy operate out of the facility. it also houses manufacturing facility for switchgears, air circuit breakers (acbs) and moulded case circuit breakers (mccbs).
bombardier transportation, a canadian company, has established rail coach manufacturing plant in savli along with other manufacturing companies such as alstom, siemens and voltas.  this plant manufactures coaches for delhi metro and the new generation rollingstock for brisbane, australia. the plant is also manufacturing trainsets for delhi - meerut rrts.
tata advanced systems limited(tasl), a subsidiary of tata group and airbus joint-venture has set up c-295 transport aircraft manufacturing facility at vadodara as part of a rs 22,000 crore deal to supply 56 such aircraft. the c-295 will replace the avro aircraft in service with the indian air force. this project will make vadodara, a defense manufacturing hub. the first made in india aircraft is expected in september 2026.
the revenue for the city is generated through taxes, service provision, and state government assistance. the taxes include general taxes, conservancy taxes, water taxes whereas the non-tax or service can be water charges, rent from municipal properties, public service charges, etc. the vmc budget for the year 2020–2021 against the proposed budget of rs 3,554 crore last year, stood at rs 3,770 crore this year.
