vadodara
Government and politics
government and politics
vadodara city officials   mayor  mr keyur rokadiya   municipal commissioner  mrs . shalini agarwal   police commissioner  shamsher singh ips
khanderao market – vadodara mahanagar seva sadan building
the vadodara city's municipal corporation or maha nagar palika is a part of the vadodara district. the district is set up in three distinct levels of administration, which are the collectorate - the district falls under the jurisdiction of a collector; the prant offices which take care of the affairs of taluka and other state government offices and the mamlatdar or taluka offices. the overall district administration has four departments: city survey, district supply office, district planning office, and district election office.
the city elects one member to the lok sabha (parliament) and five to the gujarat vidhan sabha (assembly). all of the five assembly seats of vadodara were won by the bjp during the legislative elections in 2017. in the 2021 vmss/vmc elections, the bjp won 69 seats, seven seats went to the congress.
election wards: 19 seats (corporators): 76 population per ward: 87,826 seats reserved for women: 38 total voters (as on 1 january 2019): 1,638,300
civic administration
mandvi gate
according to the 2011 census, the total urban agglomeration (ua) population of vadodara is 35,17,191. this is governed by the vadodara municipal corporation which was founded in 1951. it was initially called the baroda municipal corporation but later changed to vadodara municipal corporation after the city's name was changed in the year 1974. the bombay municipal corporation act of 1951 was setup as the main legislation for the administration and governance of the vadodara municipal corporation.
the city limits of vadodara have expanded since: an area of 148 km (57 sq mi) was added in the year 2002, followed by 15 to 20 km (5.8 to 7.7 sq mi) of additional expansion to the north of the city in 2006. the villages sayajipura, bapod, kapurai, khatamba, tarsal kalali, gorva, chhani and vemali were added to the vmc boundaries in 2017 and the latest expansion notice has been given to the seven villages of sevasi, bhayli, vemali, bil, karodiya, undera and vadadala in the year 2020.
city governance
baroda museum and picture gallery
the bombay provincial municipal corporations act, 1949 governs the vadodara municipal corporation. the gujarat provincial municipal corporations act of 1949 which is derived from the bombay act no. lix of 1949 is another legislation which most municipal corporation, including vadodara in gujarat function under.
the highest body of power in the municipal corporation is the general board, which is composed of elected members from each ward within the vmc. there are 19 wards under the vmc, each of which consists 4 seats of councilor which has a 50% reservation of seats for women. there are a total of 76 councilors elected for this vmc term where every councilor is appointed in various committees for a period of one year.
the vmc has twelve executive committees apart from the standing committee, which look after the specialized functions of vmc. these committees include public works committee, water work committee, drainage and sewerage committee, health committee, town planning committee, estate management committee, recreation and culture committee, electric committee, and legal committee. each committee consists of 12 councilors each. the formulation of an additional ward committee is recommended by the gujarat provincial municipal corporation act of 1949 for a city exceeding the population of three lakhs- which is above the current population of vadodara.
politics
three corporators are elected from each ward, who in turn elect a mayor. executive powers are vested in the municipal commissioner, who is an ias officer appointed by the gujarat state government. the mayor is responsible for the day-to-day running of the city services, municipal school board, the city bus service, the municipal hospital and the city library. the last municipal corporation election for vadodara took place in the year 2015 where bhartiya janta party won in the majority with 57 out of the total 76 seats, followed by the indian national congress (inc) with 14 seats.
there are six sitting mlas who have vmc under their jurisdiction and are currently part of the state ministry. rajendrabhai trivedi is the bjp mla and incumbent 14th speaker of gujarat legislative assembly, who was unanimously elected on 9 february 2018. jitendra sukhadia is the minister of tourism, non-resident gujarati division as well as the food, civil supplies, and consumer affairs. saurabhbhai patel is the incumbent energy minister of gujarat while yogeshbhai patel heads the ministry of state for narmada development. the mla madhubhai shrivastav is the state appointed gujarat agro industries corporation (gaic) chief and manisha vakil is bjp's vadodara city assembly constituency mla.
law and order
the vadodara city police are responsible for law enforcement and public safety in vadodara, gujarat. the vadodara city police is headed by a police commissioner, an ips officer. they are a subdivision of the state police force of gujarat and are headed by a commissioner. the vadodara police force is responsible for the protection and safety of vadodara citizens. shamsher singh, a previous serving as the additional director general of police (state crime record bureau cum computer centre), gandhinagar, is the current police commissioner of the vadodara. he formally took charge on 1 january 2021.
