vadodara
Civic services
civic services
the flora clock at sayaji baug
there are three civic service departments under the municipal corporation: the engineering department, the health department, and the support or administration department.
these departments together provide services, infrastructure and management for the entire city. the engineering department manages infrastructure and services provided through cells or sub-departments like bridge cell, drainage project, town development, streetlight, electrical sewerage, mechanical sewerage, building project, solid waste management, road, storm water drainage, water work, land and estate. the health department takes care of public health-related issues and services through its solid waste management, health and i.c.d.s. sub-departments. the health department also has a sub-department for managing birth, death & marriage registrations. the support department handles all it and administration-related issues and services with cells like it, accounts audit, census, p.r.o., election, land & estate (acquisition), shops & establishment, assessment, and u.c.d.-n.u.l.m departments.
urban planning
the two main institutions involved in planning and development in vadodara are vmss and the vadodara urban development authority (vuda). the responsibilities of both these agencies are demarcated clearly not only physically but also functionally. the governing acts for both institutions differ. the principal responsibility of vuda is to ensure a holistic development of the vadodara agglomeration covering an area of 714.56 km (275.89 sq mi), whereas vmss is involved in the development of area of 235 km (91 sq mi).
solid waste management
kalaghoda circle
the municipal corporation under its health department provides the solid waste management for the vadodara city. all zonal asst. municipal commissioners, zonal health officers, ward officers, sanitary inspectors are part of the solid waste management committee who need to be present during the weekly swm coordination meetings. the department takes care of the sweeping, cleaning and maintenance along with complaint redressal. all zonal chief, assistant municipal commissioners, zonal health officers and other sanitary staff are expected to work on field between 7am to 11am on weekdays. the solid waste management also has a litter prevention system which carries out litter patrol and charges fines as administrative fees from the defaulters.
water supply
an average of 53.2 million gallon (240 million litres) of water per day, or 38 gallon (190 litres) per person per day is provided the city daily to meets its daily water requirement. the water supply is provided by the water works department of the municipal corporation along with other agencies like the sardar sarovar narmada limited who directly supply water to vmc which is looked after the gujarat pollution control board, the gujarat water supply and sewerage board, and the water and sanitation management organization. the city receives its drinking water supply from 16 high rise water tanks and one busting station located within the city.
the sardar sarovar dam which is the one of the drinking water source for city, had halted supply temporarily after receiving complains about the high sulphur content narmada river, but was restarted again after a few days. the other sources of water are the mahi river for which the water is obtained from french well which has naturally purified water through layers of sand. the ajwa sarovar is another source of drinking water, the water of which is filtered at nimeta water purification plant.
in january 2019, vuda and gwssb joined hands to reduce the acute shortage of drinking water for residential societies near close to the vadodara city. a quantity of 3 mld water per day for three years will be provided as a temporary measure until water from the timbi pond and narmada canal reaches these residences.
drainage and sewage
nyay mandir, vadodara high court
the drainage is provided under the engineering department's drainage projects or the public health engineering laboratory (phel). the department provides planning, designing, estimating, tendering, executing and operating and maintaining the sewerage systems like the sewerage network, sewage pumping stations, sewage pumping mains, sewage treatment and effluent disposal works.
the sewage as of 2001 covered 55% area and 65% of the present population when the vmc limits extended to 108.00 km (41.70 sq mi). the public health engineering laboratory (phel) has been working on a  comprehensive sewerage system master plan for 1,425 km (550 sq mi) of sewers and nine sewage treatment works. the plan master plan is designed for the year 2021 where the project aims to increase the sewage coverage from 55% to 95% by area and 65% to 93% by population for an area of 159.31 km (61.51 sq mi).
electricity
madhya gujarat vij company limited (mgvcl) is the main electricity provision company for the gujarat state and vadodara. hydroelectricity is additionally being generated by water from sardar sarovar dam with six units of river bed power houses of 200 megawatt each.
fire and emergency
fire and rescue operations are provided by the vmc under its fire department which is provided according to the section 285 to 289 of the bpmc act. vmc has fixed rates for rescue operations & fire extinguishing within the vmc limits and outside it. the vmc's fire department also provide additional services like water tanker provision for domestic, religious or marriage purposes, providing ambulance, dead body carrier.
