varanasi
Education
education

main article: educational institutions in varanasi
the banaras hindu university in varanasi
historically, varanasi has been a centre for education in india, attracting students and scholars from across the country. varanasi has an overall literacy rate of 80% (male literacy: 85%, female literacy: 75%). it is home to a number of colleges and universities. most notably, it is the site of banaras hindu university (bhu), which is one of the largest residential universities in asia with over 20,000 students. the indian institute of technology (bhu) varanasi is designated an institute of national importance and is one of 16 indian institutes of technology. other colleges and universities in varanasi include jamia-e-imania, the institute of integrated management and technology, mahatma gandhi kashi vidyapith, nav sadhana kala kendra, sampurnanand sanskrit university and sri agrasen kanya p.g. college. various engineering colleges have been established in the outskirts of the city. other notable universities and colleges include institute of medical sciences, sampurnanand sanskrit vishwavidyalaya, central institute of higher tibetan studies, and harish chandra postgraduate college. some research oriented institutes were also established by the government such as international rice research institute (irri), indian institute of vegetable research and national seed research and training centre.
indian institute of technology in varanasi
varanasi also has three kendriya vidyalaya. among them kendriya vidyalaya bhu holds the regional office of varanasi region of kvs and is seat of deputy commissioner. kendriya vidyalaya bhu is also accredited by the british council. other kvs are kendriya vidyalaya 39 gtc and kendriya vidyalaya dlw.
st. joseph's convent school, in shivpur, varanasi, was established by the sisters of our lady of providence of france as a catholic (christian) minority institution with the approval of the government of uttar pradesh. it is an autonomous organisation under the diocese of the bishop of varanasi. it provides education not only to the catholic christian children, but also to others who abide by its rules.
another important institution is the central hindu school in kamachha. this was established by annie besant in july 1898 with the objective of imparting secular education. it is affiliated to the central board of secondary education and is open to students of all cultures.
schools in varanasi are affiliated with the indian certificate of secondary education (icse), the cbse, or the uttar pradesh board of technical education (u.p board). the overall "state of education in varanasi is ... not good." schools in varanasi vary widely in quality, with private schools outperforming government schools. in government schools, many teachers fail to come to class or to teach children. some government schools lack basic equipment, such as blackboards and sufficient desks and chairs for all students. private schools vary in quality, with the most expensive conducting lessons in english (seen as a key to children's success) and having computers in classrooms. pupils attending the more expensive private schools, tended to come from upper-class families. lower-cost private schools attracted children from lower-income families or those lower-income families with higher education aspirations. government schools tend to serve lower-class children with lower education aspirations.
