varanasi
Projects
projects
due to growing population and industrial demands, the city is being implanted with several infrastructural projects. in fiscal year 2014–18, the city was awarded with projects worth ₹30,000 crore. the city is being invested by both private and public players in different sectors. currently, there are many undergoing projects and many have been planned.
road
road in varanasi cantonment
the government is executing seven road projects connecting varanasi, the total project cost being ₹7100 crores and the total length of the project being 524 km. some important projects are:
six lane varanasi-aurangabad section of nh-19 six lane varanasi-allahabad nh-19 four lane varanasi-gorakhpur nh-29 ghagra bridge-varanasi section of nh-233 four lane varanasi-azamgarh section nh-233 four lane varanasi-sultanpur nh-56 new four lane varanasi-ayodhya highway varanasi ring road phase – 2 ganga expressway phase – 2 varanasi-ranchi-kolkata greenfield expressway purvanchal link expressway
accommodation
all ranges of accommodations are available. hotels, lodges are available. lots of dharamshalas or nattukottai chatrams are also available. for yatris who want to breath their last in this holy city, specific accommodations are also available.
railways
blw manufactured locomotives hauling load across the nation.
in 2018, the budget reflected undergoing rail projects of worth ₹4500 crore. some important projects are:
3rd rail line between varanasi-mughalsarai new delhi-varanasi high speed rail corridor eastern dedicated freight corridor (jeonathpur railway station) kashi railway station to be developed as intermodal station (ims)
airport
extension of runway by 1325 meters (first of its kind: national highway under the airport runway) new terminal with passenger capacity of 4.5 million per year
metro
the varanasi metro is a rapid transit proposed for varanasi. the proposed system consists of two lines, spanning from bhel to banaras hindu university (19.35 km) and benia bagh to sarnath (9.885 km). the feasibility study of the project was done by rites and was completed in june 2015. metro rail is likely to be completed around 2020. there will be 26 stations, including 20 underground and six elevated on the two lines, which includes total length of 29.235 km consisting of 23.467 km underground, while 5.768 km will be elevated.
the total estimated completion cost for construction of varanasi metro is estimated to be ₹13,133 crore. the project is envisaged to be undertaken as a joint venture (jv) project between the government of india (goi) and the government of uttar pradesh (goup) with 50:50 equity partnerships. to maintain the financial viability of the project, additional grants have been proposed from the two governments in addition to their equity contribution.
commercial
rudraksha convention centre kashi vishwanath corridor 100 acres freight village for multimodal terminal film city to be developed in area of 106 acres bus terminal cum shopping mall it park textile park integrated commissioner complex (icc) twin towers
