varanasi
Culture
culture
literature

see also: the city of varanasi in literature
renowned indian writers who have resided in the city were kabir, ravidas, and tulsidas, who wrote much of his ram charit manas here. kulluka bhatt wrote the best known account of manusmriti in varanasi in the 15th century. later writers of the city have included acharya shukla, baldev upadhyaya, bharatendu harishchandra, devaki nandan khatri, premchand, hazari prasad dwivedi, jaishankar prasad, kshetresa chandra chattopadhyaya, sudama pandey (dhoomil), vagish shastri, and vidya niwas mishra.
several newspapers and journals are or were published in varanasi such as varanasi chandroday and its successor kashivartaprakashika, which became a weekly journal, first published on 1 june 1851. the main newspaper is aj, a hindi-language nationalist newspaper first published in 1920. the newspaper was the bulwark of the indian national congress and is a major newspaper of hindi northern india.
art
wall paintings, varanasi, 1973
varanasi is a major centre of arts and designs. it is a producer of silks and brocades with gold and silver thread work, carpet weaving, wooden toys, bangles made of glass, ivory work, perfumes, artistic brass and copper ware and a variety of handicrafts. the cantonment graveyard of the british raj is now the location of varanasi's arts and crafts.
notable artists (musicians and dancers) and historians who are connected with the city include thakur jaidev singh, mahadev prasad mishra, bismillah khan, ravi shankar, girija devi, gopal shankar misra, gopi krishna, kishan maharaj, lalmani misra, premlata sharma, n. rajam, siddheshwari devi, samta prasad, sitara devi, chhannulal mishra, rajan sajan mishra, ritwik sanyal, soma ghosh, devashish dey, ramkrishna das and harish tiwari.
music

main article: music in varanasi
sant goswami tulsidas awadhi hindi poet and propagator of bhakthi music in varanasi
varanasi's music tradition is traced to the pauranic days. according to ancient legend, shiva is credited with evolving music and dance forms. during the medieval era, vaishnavism, a bhakti movement, grew in popularity, and varanasi became a thriving centre for musicians such as surdas, kabir, ravidas, meera and tulsidas. during the monarchic rule of govind chandra in the 16th century, the dhrupad style of singing received royal patronage and led to other related forms of music such as dhamar, hori, and chaturang. presently the dhrupad maestro pandit ritwik sanyal from varanasi is working for the revival of this art-music.
in recent times, girija devi, the native famous classical singer of thumris, was widely appreciated and respected for her musical renderings. varanasi is also associated with many great instrumentalists such as bismillah khan and ravi shankar, the famous sitar player and musicologist who was given the highest civilian award of the country, the bharat ratna. varanasi has joined the global bandwagon of unesco "cities of music" under the creative cities network.
festivals
on maha shivaratri (february), a procession of shiva proceeds from the mahamrityunjaya temple to the kashi vishwanath temple. dhrupad mela is a five-day musical festival devoted to dhrupad style held at tulsi ghat in february–march. the sankat mochan hanuman temple celebrates hanuman jayanti (march–april), the birthday of hanuman. a special puja, aarti, and a public procession is organised. since 1923, the temple has organised a five-day classical music and dance concert festival named sankat mochan sangeet samaroh, wherein iconic artists from all parts of india are invited to perform.
the ramlila of ramnagar is a dramatic enactment of rama's legend, as told in ramacharitamanasa. the plays, sponsored by kashi naresh, are performed in ramnagar every evening for 31 days. on the last day, the festivities reach a crescendo as rama vanquishes the demon king ravana. kashi naresh udit narayan singh started this tradition around 1830.
chhath puja is celebrated on the sixth day of the lunar month of kartika (october–november). the rituals are observed over four days. they include holy bathing, fasting and abstaining from drinking water (vrata), standing in water, and offering prasad (prayer offerings) and arghya to the setting and rising sun. some devotees also perform a prostration march as they head for the river banks. chhath puja is dedicated to the sun god "surya" and his sister "chhathi maiya". chhath is considered as mahaparva by the bhojpuri people. it is said that the chhath mahaparva was started in varanasi.
krishna standing on serpent kaliya during nag nathaiya festival in varanasi
nag nathaiya is celebrated on the fourth lunar day of the dark fortnight of the hindu month of kartik (october–november). it commemorates the victory of krishna over the serpent kaliya. on this occasion, a large kadamba tree (neolamarckia cadamba) branch is planted on the banks of the ganges so that a boy, playing the role of krishna, can jump into the river on to the effigy representing kaliya. he stands over the effigy in a dancing pose playing the flute, while an audience watches from the banks of the river or from boats. bharat milap celebrates the meeting of rama and his younger brother bharata after the return of the former after 14 years of exile. it is celebrated during october–november, a day after the festival of vijayadashami. kashi naresh attends this festival in his regal attire. the festival attracts a large number of devotees.
ganga mahotsav is a five-day music festival organised by the uttar pradesh tourism department, held in november–december. it culminates a day before kartik purnima, also called the ganges festival. on this occasion the ganges is attended by thousands of pilgrims, release lighted lamps to float in the river from the ghats.
the primary muslim festivals celebrated annually in the city are the ld-ul-fitr' (ramzan), bakrid, mid-sha'ban, bara wafat and muharram. additional festivals include alvida and chehlum. a non-religious festival observed by muslims is ghazi-miyan-ka-byaha ("the marriage of ghazi miyan").
