varanasi
Administration and politics
administration and politics
administration
general administration
varanasi division which consists of four districts, and is headed by the divisional commissioner of varanasi, who is an ias officer of high seniority, the commissioner is the head of local government institutions (including municipal corporations) in the division, is in charge of infrastructure development in his division, and is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the division. the district magistrate of varanasi reports to the divisional commissioner. the current commissioner is deepak agarwal.
varanasi district administration is headed by the district magistrate of varanasi, who is an ias officer. the dm is in charge of property records and revenue collection for the central government and oversees the elections held in the city. the dm is also responsible for maintaining law and order in the city, hence the ssp of varanasi also reports to the dm of varanasi. the dm is assisted by a chief development officer (cdo), four additional district magistrates (adm) (finance/revenue, city, protocol, executive), one chief revenue officer (cro), one city magistrate (cm), and four additional city magistrates (acm). the district has three tehsils, each headed by a sub-divisional magistrate. the current dm is kaushal raj sharma.
police administration
varanasi district comes under the varanasi police zone and varanasi police range, varanasi zone is headed by an additional director general ranked ips officer, and the varanasi range is headed inspector general ranked ips officer. the current adg, varanasi zone is biswajit mahapatra, and ig, varanasi range is vijay singh meena.
the district police upto the date of 24 march 2021 was headed by a senior superintendent of police (ssp), who is an ips officer, and is assisted by six superintendents of police (sp)/additional superintendents of police (addl. sp) (city, rural area, crime, traffic, protocol and protocol), who are either ips officers or pps officers. each of the several police circles is headed by a circle officer (co) in the rank of deputy superintendent of police. the last ssp was amit pathak.
on 25 march 2021 the government of uttar pradesh passed an order to divide the varanasi police into varanasi city police and rural police. since then city police is headed by the commissioner of police (cp), who is an ips officer of adgp rank, and is assisted by two additional commissioners of police (addl. cp) who is of dig rank, and two deputy commissioners of police (dcp) who are of sp rank. and rural police is headed by sp rank.
infrastructure and civic administration
the development of infrastructure in the city is overseen by the varanasi development authority (vda), which comes under the housing department of uttar pradesh government. the divisional commissioner of varanasi acts as the ex-officio chairman of the vda, whereas the vice-chairman, a government-appointed indian administrative service (ias) officer, looks after the daily matters of the authority. the current vice-chairman of the varanasi development authority is pulkit khare.
the varanasi municipal corporation oversees civic activities in the city; the head of the corporation is the mayor, and the executive and administration of the corporation is the responsibility of the municipal commissioner, who is appointed by the government of uttar pradesh and is either an ias officer or provincial civil service (pcs) officer of high seniority. the current mayor of varanasi is mridula jaiswal, and the municipal commissioner is nitin bansal.
water supply and sewage system is operated by the uttar pradesh jal nigam.
politics
varanasi is represented in the lok sabha by the current prime minister of india narendra modi who won the lok sabha elections in 2014 and subsequently in 2019 by a huge margin.
healthcare
hospitals in the city include the sir sunderlal hospital, a teaching hospital in the banaras hindu university, heritage hospital, marwari hospital, pitambari hospital, mata anand mai hospital, rajkiya hospital, ram krishna mission hospital, shiv prasad gupta hospital, pandit deen dayal upadhyay hospital (managed by the state government), and varanasi hospital and medical research centre. the urban parts of the varanasi district had an infant mortality rate of 70 per 1,000 live births in 2010–2011.
the railway cancer hospital is now being run by the tata memorial centre after intervention by prime minister narendra modi who represents varanasi.
sushruta, an ancient indian physician known as the primary author of the treatise sushruta samhita, the sanskrit text of surgery, lived in varanasi and practised medicine and surgery sometime during the 5th century bce. since 1922, ayurveda has been a subject of training in the banaras hindu university, and in 1927 a separate ayurvedic college was established. there are many ayurvedic centres in varanasi providing treatments such as panchakarma as well as other treatments.
public maintenance
because of the high population density of varanasi and the increasing number of tourists, the uttar pradesh government and international non-governmental organisations and institutions have expressed grave concern for the pollution and pressures on infrastructure in the city, mainly the sewage, sanitation, and drainage components. pollution of the ganges is a particular source of worry because of the religious significance of the river, the dependence of people on it as a source of drinking water, and its prominence as a symbol of varanasi and the city itself. the sewage problem is exacerbated by the role of the ganges in bathing and in river traffic, which is very difficult to control. because of the sewage, people using local untreated water have higher risk of contracting a range of water-borne stomach diseases.
parts of varanasi are contaminated with industrial chemicals including toxic heavy metal. studies of wastewater from varanasi's sewage treatment plants identify that water's contamination with metals and the reuse of this water for irrigation as a way that the toxic metals come to be in the plants that people grow for food. one studied example is palak, a popular leafy vegetable which takes up heavy metal when it is in the soil, and which people then eat. some of the polluting sludge contains minerals which are fertiliser, which could make polluted water attractive to use. pesticides used in local farming are persistent enough to be spread through the water, to sewer treatment, then back to the farms as wastewater.
varanasi's water supply and sewage system is maintained by jal nigam, a subsidiary of varanasi nagar nigam. power supply is by the uttar pradesh power corporation limited. the city produces about 350,000,000 litres (77,000,000 imp gal; 92,000,000 us gal) per day of sewage and 425 tonnes (418 long tons; 468 short tons) per day of solid waste. the solid wastes are disposed in one landfill site.
