varanasi
Transport
transport
varanasi is well-connected by air, rail, and road. one of the major factors in varanasi, is its access to all parts of the country. within the city mobility is provided by taxis, rickshaws, cycle rickshaws, and three-wheelers, but with certain restrictions in the old town area of the city.
air transport
the lal bahadur shastri international airport is the main airport that serves varanasi.
varanasi is served by lal bahadur shastri international airport (iata: vns, icao: vebn), which is approximately 26 km (16 mi) from the city centre in babatpur. the airport's new terminal was inaugurated in 2010, and it was granted international airport status on 4 october 2012. air india, air india express, buddha air, indigo, malindo air, spicejet, srilankan airlines, thai airasia, thai smile and vistara operate flights from varanasi to ahmedabad, bangkok, colombo, delhi, gaya, kathmandu, khajuraho, sharjah, kuala lumpur, mumbai, hyderabad, bengaluru, goa, guwahati, jaipur, kolkata and several other cities.
over 3,010,702 passengers passed through the airport in 2019–20, making it the 20th busiest airport in india. the total aircraft movement for the session 2019–20 was 24,056 while cargo tonnage equalled 3,580. total footfall of the international passengers for the session 2019–20 was 231,730.
railways
varanasi junction, is the main railway station which serves varanasi.
banaras railway station at night
varanasi junction, commonly known as varanasi cantt railway station, is the city's largest railway station. more than 360,000 passengers and 240 trains pass through each day. banaras railway station is also a terminal station of varanasi. because of huge rush at varanasi junction the railway developed the station as a high facilitated terminal. varanasi city railway station is also one of the railway stations in varanasi district. it is 4 km north-east of varanasi junction railway station. it serves as terminal station because of heavy rush at varanasi junction. mughalsarai junction railway station is also the important station in varanasi suburban.
some important express trains operating from the varanasi junction railway station and manduadih railway station are: shiv ganga express runs between new delhi junction and manduadih station while mahamana express runs between varanasi junction and new delhi junction; the udhna varanasi express that runs between udhna (surat) junction and varanasi, a distance of 1,398 kilometres (869 mi); the kashi vishwanath express that runs between varanasi and new delhi railway station; the kanpur varanasi intercity express, also called varuna express, which runs over a distance of 355 kilometres (221 mi) and connects with lucknow (the capital city of uttar pradesh) and varanasi; and the sabarmati express which runs between varanasi and ahmedabad. vande bharat express, a semi-high speed train was launched in the month of february in 2019 in the delhi-varanasi route. the train reduced the time travel between the two cities by 15 percent as compared to the shatabdi express.
varanasi has following railway stations within the city suburbs:
station name  station code  railway zone  number of platforms   varanasi junction also: varanasi cantt   bsb  northern railway  9   banaras railway station  bsbs  north eastern railway  8   varanasi city railway station  bcy  north eastern railway  5   kashi railway station  kei  northern railway  3   sarnath railway station  srnt  north eastern railway  3   deen dayal upadhyaya junction  ddu  east central railway  8   shivpur railway station  sop  northern railway  3   bhulanpur railway station  bhlp  northern railway/north eastern railway  2   lohta railway station  lot  northern railway  3
roads
ring road phase i
auto rickshaws and e-rickshaws are the most widely available forms of public transport in the old city. in the outer regions of the city, taxis are available. daily commuters prefer city buses, which operate on specific routes of urban and suburban areas. the city buses are operated by varanasi city transport service limited. nearly, 120 buses are operated by varanasi city transport service limited.
the following national highways pass through varanasi:
national highway  route  total length   nh 19  delhi » mathura » agra » kanpur » allahabad » varanasi » mohania » barhi » palsit » kolkata  1,323 km (822 mi)   nh 233  varanasi » azamgarh » tanda » basti » siddharthnagar » lumbini (nepal)  288 km (179 mi)   nh 35  mahoba » banda » chitrakoot » allahabad » mirzapur » varanasi  346 km (215 mi)   nh 31  unnao » raebareli » pratapgarh » varanasi » patna » samsi  968 km (601 mi)   nh 7  varanasi » jabalpur » nagpur » hyderabad » bangalore » kanyakumari  2,369 km (1,472 mi)
the heavy traffic of the city is monitored through integrated traffic management system. the smart traffic management system equips the city with automatic signal control system, separate signal system for pedestrians, traffic management centre at state level, area traffic control system, corridor management and dynamic traffic indicators for smooth movement of traffic. varanasi traffic police keeps an eye through smart command and control centre.
inland waterways
national waterway 1 passes through varanasi. in 2018, a new inland port was established on the banks of ganges river. the multi-modal terminal is designed to handle 1.26 million metric tons of cargo every year and covers an area of 34 hectares. nearly, ₹170 crore was invested by the government to setup an inland port. maersk started its container service in 2019 by moving 16 containers on nw-1 from varanasi to kolkata. the port also catered pepsico, iffco fertilizers, emami agrotech and dabur for cargo movement.
