varanasi
Notable landmarks
notable landmarks

main article: tourist attractions in varanasi
a view of the ghats in varanasi from the ganges.
apart from the 19 archaeological sites identified by the archaeological survey of india, some of the prominent places of interest are the aghor peeth, the alamgir mosque, the ashoka pillar, the bharat kala bhavan (art museum), the bharat mata mandir, the central university for tibetan studies, the dhanvantari temple, the durga temple, the jantar mantar, the kashi vishwanath temple, the sankat mochan hanuman temple, the mahatma gandhi kashi vidyapith, the shri vishwanath temple on the bhu campus, the ramnagar fort, the riverfront ghats, the tulsi manas temple.
ganges view from bhadaini water works, varanasi
jantar mantar
the jantar mantar observatory, constructed in 1737, is located above the ghats along the ganges, and is adjacent to the manmandir and dasaswamedh ghats and near the palace of jai singh ii of jaipur. while less equipped than the observatories at jaipur and delhi, the jantar mantar has a unique equatorial sundial which is functional and allows measurements to be monitored and recorded by one person.
ramnagar fort
ramnagar fort was built in 1750 by kashi naresh raja balwant singh.
the ramnagar fort, located near the ganges on its eastern bank and opposite the tulsi ghat, was built in the 18th century by kashi naresh raja balwant singh with cream-coloured chunar sandstone. the fort is a typical example of the mughal architecture with carved balconies, open courtyards, and scenic pavilions. at present, the fort is in disrepair. the fort and its museum are the repository of the history of the kings of benares. cited as an "eccentric" museum, it contains a rare collection of american vintage cars, bejewelled sedan chairs, an impressive weaponry hall, and a rare astrological clock. in addition, manuscripts, especially religious writings, are housed in the saraswati bhawan which is a part of a museum within the fort. many books illustrated in the mughal miniature style are also part of the collections. because of its scenic location on the banks of the ganges, it is frequently used as an outdoor shooting location for films.
ghats
the ghats in varanasi are world-renowned embankments made in steps of stone slabs along the river bank where pilgrims perform ritual ablutions. the ghats are an integral complement to the hindu concept of divinity represented in physical, metaphysical, and supernatural elements. varanasi has at least 84 ghats, most of which are used for bathing by pilgrims and spiritually significant hindu puja ceremony, while a few are used exclusively as hindu cremation sites. steps in the ghats lead to the banks of ganges, including the dashashwamedh ghat, the manikarnika ghat, the panchganga ghat, and the harishchandra ghat, where hindus cremate their dead. many ghats are associated with hindu legends and several are now privately owned.
many of the ghats were constructed under the patronage of the marathas, shindes (scindias), holkars, bhonsles, and peshwas. most are bathing ghats, while others are used as cremation sites. a morning boat ride on the ganges across the ghats is a popular tourist attraction. the extensive stretches of ghats in varanasi enhance the riverfront with a multitude of shrines, temples, and palaces built "tier on the tier above the water's edge".
the dashashwamedh ghat is the main and probably the oldest ghat of varanasi located on the ganges, close to the kashi vishwanath temple. it is believed that brahma created this ghat to welcome shiva and sacrificed ten horses during the dasa-ashwamedha yajna performed there. above and adjacent to this ghat, there are also temples dedicated to sulatankesvara, brahmesvara, varahesvara, abhaya vinayaka, ganga (the ganges), and bandi devi, which are all important pilgrimage sites. a group of priests performs "agni pooja" (sanskrit: "worship of fire") daily in the evening at this ghat as a dedication to shiva, ganga, surya (sun), agni (fire), and the entire universe. special aartis are held on tuesdays and on religious festivals.
the manikarnika ghat is the mahasmasana, the primary site for hindu cremation in the city. adjoining the ghat, there are raised platforms that are used for death anniversary rituals. according to a myth, it is said that an earring of shiva or his wife sati fell here. fourth-century gupta period inscriptions mention this ghat. however, the current ghat as a permanent riverside embankment was built in 1302 and has been renovated at least three times throughout its existence.
the jain ghat is believed to birthplace of suparshvanatha (7th tirthankara) and parshvanatha (23rd tirthankara). the jain ghat or bachraj ghat is a jain ghat and has three jain temples located on the banks of the river. it is believed that the jain maharajas used to own these ghats. bachraj ghat has three jain temples near the river's banks, and one them is a very ancient temple of tirthankara suparswanath.
ghats in varanasi    dashashwamedh ghat       manikarnika ghat       the jain ghat/bachraj ghat       kedar ghat during kartika purnima
temples

main articles: hindu temples in varanasi and religion in varanasi
the kashi vishwanath temple, the most important temple in varanasi.       shri vishwanath mandir has the tallest temple tower in the world.       the 18th century durga kund temple       parshvanath jain temple
among the estimated 23,000 temples in varanasi, the temples most popular for worship are: the kashi vishwanath temple of shiva; the sankat mochan hanuman temple; and the durga temple, known for monkeys that reside in the large trees nearby.
the kashi vishwanath temple, on the ganges, is one of the 12 jyotirlinga shiva temples in varanasi. the temple has been destroyed and rebuilt several times throughout its existence. the gyanvapi mosque, which is adjacent to the temple, is the original site of the temple. the temple, which is also known as the golden temple, was built in 1780 by queen ahilyabai holkar of indore. the two pinnacles of the temple are covered in gold and were donated in 1839 by ranjit singh, the ruler of punjab. the dome is scheduled to receive gold plating through a proposed initiative of the ministry of culture and religious affairs of uttar pradesh. numerous rituals, prayers, and aartis are held daily at the temple between 02:30 and 23:00. the sankat mochan hanuman temple, which is situated by the asi river, is one of the sacred temples of the hindu god hanuman. the present temple was built in the early 1900s by the educationist and indian independence figure, pandit madan mohan malaviya, the founder of banaras hindu university. according to hindu legend the temple was built on the spot where the medieval hindu saint tulsidas had a vision of hanuman. during a 7 march 2006 terrorist attack, one of three explosions hit the temple while a wedding was in progress, and resulted in injuries to 30 people apart from 23 deaths. following the attack, a permanent police post was installed inside the temple. there are two temples dedicated to the goddess durga in varanasi: durga mandir built in the 16th century (exact date not known), and durga kund (sanskrit 'kund' meaning "pond or pool") built in the 18th century. a large number of hindu devotees visit durga kund during navratri to worship the goddess durga. the temple, built in the nagara architectural style, has multi-tiered spires and is stained red with ochre, representing the red colour of durga. the building has a rectangular tank of water called the durga kund ("kund" meaning a pond or pool). during annual celebrations of nag panchami, the act of depicting the god vishnu reclining on the serpent shesha is recreated in the kund. while the annapurna temple, located nearby to the kashi vishwanath temple, is dedicated to annapoorna devi, the goddess of food, the sankatha temple adjacent to the sindhia ghat is dedicated to sankatha, the goddess of remedy. the sankatha temple has a large sculpture of a lion and a cluster of nine smaller temples dedicated to the nine planets. parshvanath jain temple is the temple of jain religion dedicated to parshvanath, the 23rd thirthankara who was born at bhelpur in varanasi. the idol deified in the temple is of black colour and 75 centimetres (30 inches) in height. it is located in bhelapur about 5 kilometres (3.1 miles) from the centre of varanasi city and 3 kilometres (1.9 miles) from the benares hindu university. it belongs to the digambar sect of jainism and is a holy tirtha or pilgrimage centre for jains. other temples of note are: the bharat mata mandir, dedicated to the national personification of india, which was inaugurated by mahatma gandhi in 1936, the kalabhairav temple, the mrithyunjay mahadev temple, and the new vishwanath temple located in the campus of bhu, the tulsi manas mandir.
mosques
alamgiri mosque
there are 15 mosques of significant historical value in varanasi. of particular note are the abdul razzaq, alamgir, bibi razia, chaukhambha, dhai nim kangore, fatman, ganje shahada, gyanavapi, and hazrat sayyed salar masud dargah. many of these mosques were constructed from the components of the hindu shrines which were destroyed under the auspices of subsequent muslim invaders or rulers. the two such well known mosques are the gyanvapi mosque and the alamgir mosque.
the gyanvapi mosque was built by the mughal emperor aurangzeb in 1664 ce, after destroying a hindu temple. gyan vapi (sanskrit: "the well of knowledge"), the name of the mosque, is derived from a well of the same name located within the precincts of the mosque. the remains of an erstwhile temple can be seen in the foundation, the columns and at the rear part of the mosque. the façade of the mosque is modelled partially on the taj mahal's entrance. the mosque is administered by the anjuman inthazamiya masajid (aim).
the alamgiri mosque was built in the 17th century by aurangzeb over the ruins of a hindu temple. the hindu temple that was destroyed was dedicated to vishnu, and had been built by beni madhur rao scindia, a maratha chieftain. when emperor aurangzeb had captured banaras, he had ordered total destruction of all hindu temples there. aurangzeb then built a mosque over the ruins of this temple in 1669 and named it as alamagir mosque in the name of his own honorific title "alamgir" which he had adopted after becoming the emperor of mughal empire. the mosque is located at a prominent site above the panchganga ghat, which is a funerary ghat facing the ganges. the mosque is architecturally a blend of islamic and hindu architecture, particularly because of the lower part of the walls of the mosque having been built fully with the remains of the hindu temple. the mosque has high domes and minarets. two of its minarets had been damaged; one minaret crashed killing a few people and the other minaret was officially brought down because of stability concerns. non-muslims are not allowed to enter the mosque. the mosque has a security cordon of a police force.
shri guru ravidass janam asthan
memorial of sant ravidas at sant ravidas ghat
shri guru ravidass janam asthan, at sir gobardhan is the ultimate place of pilgrimage or religious headquarters for followers of the ravidassia religion. the foundation stone was laid on 14 june 1965 on ashad sankranti day at the birthplace of ravidas. the temple was completed in 1994.
sarnath
sarnath, the suburb of varanasi
sarnath is located 10 kilometres north-east of varanasi near the confluence of the ganges and the varuna rivers in uttar pradesh, india. the deer park in sarnath is where gautama buddha first taught the dharma, and where the buddhist sangha came into existence through the enlightenment of kondanna.
the city is mentioned by the buddha as one of the four places of pilgrimage to which his devout followers should visit. it was also the site of the buddha's dhammacakkappavattana sutta, which was his first teaching after attaining enlightenment, in which he taught the four noble truths and the teachings associated with it.
