vasai-virar
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
the city is well connected to mumbai by western railway and through mumbai-ahmedabad national highway. the city is connected to navi mumbai, thane, bhiwandi, kalyan and panvel node of navi mumbai city by the vasai-diva railway line. vasai virar city has significant growth potential due to close proximity to city-proper mumbai.
railways[edit]
mumbai suburban local train
vasai–virar city is connected by the western railway and central railway. the major railway stations on the western and central railway in vasai–virar city are:
virar railway station (western railway): all local, memu, shuttle, very few express trains but all passenger trains halt or depart from here. nala sopara railway station (western railway) : all local & memu halt here. vasai road railway station (western/central railway) : vasai road railway station is a junction. all local, memu, shuttle, express trains but only which are coming from bhiwandi side & all passenger trains halt or depart from here. naigaon railway station (western railway) : all local trains halt here. juchandra railway station (central railways) : all memu local halt here. kaman road railway station (central railway) : all memu local halt here.
road[edit]
marcopolo bus
mini bus
vasai-virar city municipal corporation started its own transport service on 3 october 2012 in association with bhagirathi transport corporation pvt ltd, known as vvmt. it operates a large number of bus lines in the vasai-virar city. vvmt also plies its buses in vasai-virar villages. it also has operation outside city limits into neighbouring city of mira-bhayander, thane city & mumbai city. vvmt bus ply from vasai to thane & vasai to mulund.
other towns & cities where vvmt buses connects   mira-bhayander city   thane city   mumbai city
information of vvmt bus routes & bus depot   no of bus routes  32   no of depots  1 (agarwal nagar, vasai east) 2 (navghar, vasai east)
operations
the vvmt bus routes are spread town-wide and also to neighboring towns and cities. the vvmt operates inter-city services to three different areas beyond the municipal limits of vasai-virar town, i.e. into the limits of the municipal corporations of mira-bhayander, thane and mumbai.
vasai-virar city the local bus services of the city, which are operated by vvmc. the internal places of vasai-virar city which are far from the virar, nalasopara, vasai road, naigaon  railway stations are connected by vvmt. the major concentration has always been vasai-virar city and with vast growing population in the city.
vasai-virar villages it is not official, but some faraway villages from the virar, nalasopara and vasai are connected by vvmt buses. vvmt services are not so frequent in villages as in the city.
mira-bhayander city services start from virar, nalasopara and vasai road railway stations and passes by bhayandar via godbunder road. the inter city connection between the vasai-virar city (which on the western railway side) and (which is on the central railway side).
thane city thane city is connected to vasai by the vvmt. from vasai it starts its services towards thane. the inter city connection is between vasai-virar city (which is on the western railway side) and thane city / central mumbai city (via thane city) (which is on the central railway side).
mumbai city brihanmumbai electricity supply and transport (best)  is the largest public transport provider in the mumbai city & suburbs. vvmt connects the last station in mumbai's suburb mulund to the vasai-virar. the inter-city connection is between vasai-virar town on the western railway side and central mumbai city on the central railway side.
