vasai-virar
Governance and politics[edit]
governance and politics[edit]
the vasai–virar urban town is governed by vasai-virar municipal corporation. the town was formed in 2009 when it was joined administratively with virar and other surrounding communities. vasai-virar city has been separated from greater mumbai and mira-bhayandar city because of presence of vasai creek. vvcmc is declared as ”c” class municipal corporation.
civic administration[edit]
vasai-virar municipal corporation (vvmc) was formed on 3 july 2010. it is headed by a municipal commissioner, shri. gangatharan d, an indian administrative service officer. he wields the executive power. a quinquennial election is held to elect the governing body, who are responsible for overseeing that their constituencies have the basic civic infrastructure in place, and that there is no lacuna on the part of the authorities.
the position of mayor is a largely ceremonial post with limited duties but the office-holder heads the party with the largest vote. the current mayor of the city shri. narayan mankar. the total number of electoral wards within the city jurisdiction is a 115.
civic services[edit]
public transport: the vvmt uses diesel powered buses for its operation. all buses with electronic display board are introduced in the fleet, which have destination with the route number flashing in marathi as well as english on front of the buses. the vvmt bus routes are spread city-wide and also to neighboring cities. the vvmt operates inter-city services to three different areas beyond the municipal limits of vasai-virar city, i.e. into the limits of the municipal corporations of the cities of mira-bhayander, thane and mumbai.
digital services: the vvmc website provides information on grocery shops, ration shops, medical shops and community kitchen lists. the website also includes list of eye and blood banks in the city. the website also holds minutes of general body meeting since 2015.
water supply: laying of water pipeline in the coastal regulation zone iii area of kaman river has been approved for the surya dam water project. the mumbai metropolitan region development authority is executing the 403 million litres daily project (mld) that will bring an additional 54 mld water supply to the vasai-virar region.
citizen engagement: a blog known as vasai virar blog for local information is managed by few citizens and can be used by all. it provides information on various services provided in the city like ambulance service and their contact numbers, hospital location in the city and the nearest police station. in addition, information about schools and colleges in the area are also available.
