vellore
Education[edit]
education[edit]

main article: list of educational institutions in vellore
vellore is considered a prominent destination for medical and technological education in india. it has a state-government university, a private technological university, one government and one private medical school and several engineering and arts and science colleges.
notable islamic and arabic college in vellore is bakqiyat salihat arabic college.
the country's first stem-cell translational research centre was established in vellore in december 2005. the central government's biotechnology department selected the christian medical college (cmc) as the first in a series of centers as it already had world-class clinical hematology and biochemistry departments. the college made a breakthrough which attracted the attention of the country's medical and scientific community: the centre for stem cell research at the christian medical college succeeded in reprogramming cells from adult mice to make them function like stem cells found in the human embryo. the agricultural research station at virinjipuram is in the northeastern zone of tamil nadu. it is one of 32 research stations of tamil nadu agricultural university (tnau). the government of india-sponsored national watershed development project for rainfed areas (nwdpra) scheme has been in operation since october 1997, and it makes conservation measures conducted in water and soil of 18 watersheds in the vellore and tiruvannamalai districts.
thiruvalluvar university was split off from the university of madras and is located near vallimalai, vellore. most government-run arts and science colleges in vellore, tiruvannamalai, villupuram and cuddalore districts are affiliated with thiruvalluvar university. thanthai periyar government institute of technology is the only government engineering college in vellore. the vellore institute of technology (vit) has been ranked best private engineering university in india by the magazine india today.
main building of the christian medical college hospital
christian medical college & hospital (cmch), one of the largest hospitals in india and asia, is based out of vellore. it is a major health care provider for the surrounding districts.
auxilium women's college (founded in 1954) is the first women's college in vellore district; other arts and sciences colleges in the city are the dhanabakyam krishnaswamy mudhaliar women's college (dkm) near sainathapuram and the muthurangam government arts college (mgac) in otteri, near bagayam. voorhees college (founded 1898) is the oldest college in the district and known as the institution where sarvepalli radhakrishnan (former president of india) studied; a commemorative stamp for the centenary of the college was issued by the government of india. c. abdul hakeem college is in melvisharam. arignar anna arts college for women (aaa) is located in walajapet.
the government law college was established in 2008. it offers a three-year bachelor of laws (bl) degree with an annual intake of 80 students. the college is in katpadi, vellore. there are several arabic colleges in vellore such as the madrasa al-baqiyathus salihath (popularly known as baaqiyaath), founded by shah abdul wahab and is the second oldest arabic college in india after darul uloom deoband in uttar pradesh.
schieffelin institute of health – research and leprosy centre (sih-r & lc) is located near vellore and was established in 1955 to care for leprosy patients.
