vellore
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

main article: economy of vellore
according to the indian census of 2001, the urban workforce employment rate of vellore is 43.64%. vellore, being the headquarters of the district, has registered growth in its tertiary sector activities with a corresponding decrease in the primary sector. most employment is provided by the leather industry, tobacco industry, agricultural trading, and industries in and around the city. approximately 83.35% of the workforce is employed in tertiary sector comprising transport, services and commerce. the secondary sector activities like manufacturing and household industries employs 13.52% of the workforce. male worker employment (43.64%) is higher than female work employment (24.39%).
vellore is known as the leather hub of india. hundreds of leather and tannery facilities are around vellore and nearby towns, such as ranipet, ambur and vaniyambadi. the vellore district is the top exporter of finished leather goods in the country. vellore leather accounts for more than 37% of the country's export of leather and leather-related products (such as finished leathers, shoes, garments and gloves). bharat heavy electricals limited (bhel) is one of the nine major government owned enterprises in the nation. the boiler auxiliaries plant of bhel in ranipet is the industrial hub of vellore. chemical plants in the ranipet-sipcot economic zone are a major source of income to vellore residents. eid parry is a sanitary-ware manufacturing company with 38% of the world's market share in bathroom accessories. tirumalai chemicals and greaves are among the international brands that have manufacturing units in the city. automobile and mechanical companies of global brands, including same deutz-fahr, tvs–brakes india, mitsubishi, greaves cotton and mrf have their manufacturing units in the area. brakes india sholingur's foundry division is located at vellore-sholingur and is a major employer in the area. asia's biggest explosives manufacturing company, tamil nadu explosives limited (tel), is in vellore at katpadi. this is india's only government explosives company with more than a thousand employees. the company is headed by a senior indian administrative service officer. kramski stamping and molding india pvt ltd, a german precision metal and plastic integrated-component manufacturing company with automotive, telecommunications, electronics and medical applications is located in erayankadu, near vellore. major businesses in the city center are on officer's line, town hall road, long bazaar and bangalore, scudder, arni, gandhi and katpadi roads. many boarding and lodging houses are in and around scudder and gandhi roads. microsoft corporation (india) pvt. ltd. announced the launch of 14 microsoft innovation centers (mics) in india. trichy, vellore, coimbatore, madurai and salem in tamil nadu.
christian medical college & hospital (cmch), on ida scudder road in the heart of the city, is vellore's largest private employer and has a large floating population from other parts of india and abroad. lodging, hospitals and allied businesses are among the major sources of income generated in the central part of the city. the government vellore medical college and hospital (vmch) are located at adukamparai in vellore. with hospitals such as apollo kh hospital in melvisharam and sri narayani hospital & research centre in sripuram, coupled with colleges such as cmc & vit and other engineering and science colleges, the health care industry is growing rapidly.
'naruvi hospitals' is being built at a cost of 3300 million inr, a joint venture between vellore based 'pearl human care' and detroit-based henry ford health system. sri narayani aayurvedic centre, was inaugurated by union minister of state for ayush shripad yesso naik on august, 2019.
other rural industries than agriculture include weaving and beedi and matchstick rolling. the indian army has a number of recruits from the vellore district (especially from kammavanpet known as "the military village") and military spending is a major source of income.
