vellore
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]
road[edit]
nh 48 green circle junction (central bus terminus) flyover in vellore city
the vellore municipal corporation maintains 104.332 km (64.829 mi) of roads. it has 50.259 km (31.229 mi) of concrete road, 6.243 km (3.879 mi) of kutcha road and 47.88 km (29.75 mi) of bituminous road. the national highways passing through or terminating at vellore as per new numbering are:
highway number destination via   48 chennai kanchipuram, sriperumbudur,   delhi bengaluru, pune, mumbai, vadodara, udaipur, jaipur   38 thoothukudi tiruvannamalai, tiruchirappalli, madurai   40 hyderabad chittoor, kadapa, kurnool   75 mangaluru gudiyattam, pernambut, venkatagirikota, kolar, bengaluru, hassan, sakleshpura
vellore is connected with major cities in the states of tamil nadu, andhra pradesh and karnataka. bus service is available to chennai, coimbatore, bangalore, thiruvananthapuram, tirupathi, kadapa, anantapur, salem, chittoor, kuppam, kolar, kolar gold fields, madanapalle, vijayawada, hyderabad, mangalore, karur, kumbakonam, aranthangi, mannargudi, nagapattinam, hosur, marthandam, thoothukudi, thiruchendur, sengottai, cuddalore, kurnool, kadiri, trichy, thuraiyur, thammampatti, thiruvannamalai, tindivanam, pondicherry, kallakkurichi, tirupattur, viluppuram, kanyakumari, arani, madurai, tirunelveli, kanchipuram, tiruttani, kalpakkam, pallikonda, ponnai, gudiyatham, dharmapuri, erode, tirupur, palakkad, krishnagiri, mumbai gingee and other major towns and cities in south india. vellore is served by a city bus service, which connects the city, suburbs, and other places of interest. the bus service extends about 30 km from the city center. there are two bus terminals: the town bus terminus (opposite the fort and near cmc hospital) and the central bus terminus (near green circle). other bus terminals are located at chittor bus stand (near vit road), bagayam and katpadi (junction bus stop). the bus stands are maintained by the vellore municipal corporation. vellore new integrated bus terminus was constructed at a cost of ₹46.51 crore in a 9.25 acre area under the smart city project by the vellore city municipal corporation, it was completed in 24 months and become operational by january 2022.
rail[edit]
vellore has three main railway stations: vellore katpadi junction, vellore cantonment and vellore town. the largest is vellore katpadi junction (5 km north of cmc hospital). it is a major railway junction on the chennai-bangalore broad-gauge line running to chennai, bangalore, tirupati, new delhi, howrah, kanyakumari. there are direct rail links to vijayawada junction, tirupati, jhansi, bhubaneswar, nagpur, bangalore, coimbatore, lucknow, dehradun, agartala, ahmedabad, ludhiana, bhopal junction, mumbai, mangalore, tiruchchirapalli, mayiladuthurai, chidambaram, kumbakonam, bilaspurkorba, patna, ernakulam, trivandrum, kanniyakumari, shirdi, kanpur, gaya, dhanbad, jammu tawi, madurai, bhilai, gwalior, chennai central, howrah station, new delhi railway station, coimbatore, guwahati, silchar, madhupur, nagarcoil, kozhikode, kollam, bhagalpur, jaipur, dibrugarh, varanasi, pune, hyderabad, vishakapatnam and other major cities. more than 150 trains cross the vellore-katpadi junction daily. nearly 250 to 265 trains halt this junction. this is the major and busiest junction in south india and 1st important railway station in vellore district.
vellore cantonment is in suriyakulam on the viluppuram-tirupati broad gauge line, 8 km from katpadi junction. emu and passenger trains to tirupati, chennai and arakonnam depart from here. the 150-km broad gauge line was extended to villupuram in january 2010. it connects vellore and south tamil nadu; however, as of january 2019 it is serviced by slow passenger trains. the line was opened for goods trains in june 2010. an emu from vellore cantonment to chennai central was introduced on december 22, 2008. vellore town station is in konavattam on the line connecting katpadi junction with viluppuram junction via tiruvannamalai.
air[edit]

main article: vellore airport
the vellore airport was established in 1934 and is located in abdullapuram, 11 km away from the city centre. it had been used to land trainer aircraft and helicopters. it was reactivated as a part of the airports authority of india idle airports activation programme in july 2006 to facilitate regular flying by trainee pilots of the madras flying club whose operations were restricted with the increase in scheduled aircraft movement at chennai airport. vellore airport is in the process of being revived under the regional connectivity scheme (rcs). udan, runway and terminal building works are under progress, all the required infrastructure works scheduled to be ready by june 2019 for operations.
