vijayawada
Governance[edit]
governance[edit]

main article: administration of vijayawada
civic administration[edit]
vijayawada municipal corporation is the civic governing body of the city and was the first iso 9001 certified urban local body in the country.
it was constituted on 1 april 1888 and was upgraded to selection grade municipality in 1960, and, to the corporation in 1981. the jurisdictional area of the corporation is spread over an area of 230 km (89 sq mi) with 64 wards. the present municipal commissioner of the city is sri v. prasanna venkatesh, ias and the present mayor is rayana bhagya lakshmi. vijayawada is the headquarters of andhra pradesh capital region development authority.
as per the g.o. 104 (dated:23-03-2017), the state government had declared vijayawada municipal corporation and its contiguous areas as a metropolitan area of vijayawada. its jurisdiction is spread over an area of 230 km (89 sq mi) and has an estimated population of 18 lakhs. the metropolitan area covers vijayawada municipal corporation and merged villages of ambapuram, buddavaram, done atkuru, enikepadu, ganguru, gannavaram, gollapudi, gudavalli, jakkampudi, kanuru, kesarapalle, nidamanuru, nunna, pathapadu, penamaluru, phiryadi nainavaram, poranki, prasadampadu, ramavarappadu, tadigadapa, kankipadu, vuyyuru, katuru, bollapadu, mudunuru and yanamalakuduru. the urban agglomeration spread in guntur district covers tadepalle municipality and its outgrowth of undavalli; mangalagiri municipality and its outgrowths of navuluru and atmakur.
utility services[edit]
water supply from the 59 water reservoirs, maintenance of roads, sewerage, underground drainage, environment protection programs, recycling of solid waste and producing power are the services provided by the vijayawada municipal corporation. there has been an underground drainage system in the city since 1967–68. many green parks are maintained by the corporation to protect the environment such as raghavaiah park, rajiv gandhi park, dr. b.r ambedkar park, mahatma gandhi park etc. the corporation won many awards and achievements such as national urban water award (2009), siti e-governance project, iso 9001 certification for quality management system.
the andhra pradesh state disaster response and fire services department with its headquarters in the city is responsible for protecting from fire accidents that occur during summers on the hill slope areas of the city.
pollution control[edit]
the report on solid waste generation in 46 metro cities for the year 2015–16 shows vijayawada produces 550 tonnes of solid waste per day. vijayawada is one of the cities to be covered under the solar/green cities scheme launched by the ministry of new and renewable energy and is one of the 15 cities in the country listed in pilot solar cities.
in 2007, the andhra pradesh state road transport corporation (apsrtc) that operates the city's public transport system introduced less-polluting cng fueled public transport busses in a drive to reduce the operational cost and protect the environment. in 2019, with the cost of cng and fleet maintenance on the rise, the apsrtc had begun replacing the cng run busses with bs4 and bs6 standard diesel-fueled buses. however, apsrtc continues to be committed to alternative fuels for its fleet. it has since added more electric, and biodiesel fueled busses.
likewise, the city has a large number of cng fueled auto-rickshaws that support public transportation needs. however, auto-rickshaw operators have frequently suffered disruption in cng supply and usually endure long queues to refuel. in february 2020, piaggio vehicles private limited launched the sale of electric auto-rickshaws in the city.
law and order[edit]
the vijayawada city police has its own police commissionerate, which is responsible for an area of 1,211.16 km (467.63 sq mi), is headed by a police commissioner, who is an ips officer of additional director general of police rank along with one joint commissioner of police and four deputy commissioners of police who are also ips officers. the present police commissioner is bathini sreenivasulu.
