vijayawada
Economy[edit]
economy[edit]

main article: economy of vijayawada
a view of pvp mall on m.g. road
vijayawada is one of the rapidly growing urban markets of the country. the sectors that contribute to the city economy are construction, education, entertainment, food processing, hospitality, registrations, transport, etc. based on the recommendations of the sixth central pay commission, it is classified as one of the y-grade cities of india. according to one study, the gdp of the city in 2010 was $3 billion (rs. 18,000 crore) and is expected to grow up to $17 billion (rs. 1,02,000 crore) by 2025. according to another by oxford the gdp of the city in 2018 was $5.8 billion and is expected to grow up to $21 billion by 2035.
andhra cements (1937) was the first cement factory in andhra pradesh. siris pharmaceuticals was the first pharma company in andhra pradesh and was established in 1950.
the city has trading and exporting markets for agriculture and industrial goods. the nunna mango market is one of the largest mango markets in asia, exporting to major cities in the country. it is also a hub for storage, bottling, and transportation of petroleum products of all major companies like bpcl, hpcl, and ioc.
the city is also attracting many international it companies. hcl technologies, wipro, the noida-based indian multinational is constructing its vijayawada campus in kesarapalli village, near to gannavaram. in the first phase, hcl will provide employment to 5,000 students.
there are two major it parks one at gannavaram and other in mangalagiri there are big companies like techmahindra, hcl, pi data center, vsoft, efftronics, kj systems, and epsoft. the city is also most preferred tier-two city destination for it/ites services. there is an apiic mega food park in mandavalli near gannavaram.
the growing population and economy have resulted in rising real estate prices. there is also a cyber security office that is operating by tech mahindra.and the  wonderla an amusement park is trying to invest around 250 crores rupees to expand its branch in between guntur and vijayawada in 50 acres.
