vijayawada
Culture[edit]
culture[edit]
kondapalli toys, craftwork from a suburb of vijayawada
night view of prakasam barrage
the city is known in the state for its cultural history, whose residents are more often referred to as vijayawadians. there are many religions, languages, traditions, and festivals. durga pooja and a special theppotsavam in krishna river are important events of the hindu festival of dussera in the city, mainly due to the existence of self-manifested kanaka durga temple. hazarat bal mosque is a muslim shrine housing the holy relic of the prophet mohammed. the gunadala mary matha church is an important shrine for christians and illuminates during christmas eve.
the city corporation organises "happy sunday," an event organised on the first sunday of every month at m.g. road for promoting activities such as sports, games, cultural events, and yoga. the clothing of the locals includes traditional men wearing dhoti and women wearing saree and salwar kameez. western clothing is also predominant.
arts, crafts and artefacts[edit]
the vijayawada art society promotes telugu arts. the city hosted poetic prism 2015, a multilingual poet's meet on 19 september 2015. all these activities are organised in collaboration with the cultural centre of vijayawada. kondapalli toys — which were granted geographical indication in 2007 — are handmade by the artisans of kondapalli, a suburb of vijayawada. victoria jubilee museum is an archaeological museum in the city, which houses sculptures, paintings, and artefacts of buddhist and hindu relics, dating back to the second and third centuries.
cityscape[edit]

main article: list of visitor attractions in vijayawada
panorama of vijayawada
vijayawada was paired as a sister city of modesto, california in 1993. the city has old and new town areas. the one town area of the city is known as old city area, comprising areas such as islampet, jendachettu centre, kamsalipet, rajarajeswaripet, kothapet, ajith singh nagar, and winchipet. the new city areas include areas such as autonagar, benz circle, chuttugunta, labbipet, machavaram down, mogalrajapuram, ntr circle, tikkle road, governorpeta, pinnamaneni polyclinic road and suryaraopet.
vijayawada city from gandhi hill
brindavan colony, commercial taxes colony, gunadala, veterinary colony are some of the residential areas. bank colony, bharati nagar, gayatri nagar, currency nagar, satyanarayana puram, gurunanak colony, apiic colony, lic colony, patamata and mg road are the upscale residential areas. the major commercial areas include the stretch of mg road and from benz circle to ramavarappadu ring. other commercial centers are besant road, rajagopalachari street, one town market area covering kaleswara rao market (kr market), and vastralatha.
the city has many landmarks which include, prakasam barrage across the krishna river; krishnaveni mandapam (river museum) depicting the history of krishna river and a nearby idol of the river known as, krishnaveni statue; gandhi hill, the first gandhi memorial in the country, located at an elevation of 500 feet (150 m) on a hill; bhavani island, one of the largest river island amidst krishna river.
