vijayawada
Transport[edit]
transport[edit]

main article: transport in vijayawada
public transport[edit]
the primary modes of intra-city public transport are city buses and auto rickshaws. apart from these, other means of transport are motorcycles, cycle rickshaws, and bicycles. the pandit nehru bus station and the vijayawada junction railway station are the major transport infrastructure for road and rail transport. the pandit nehru bus station is the administrative headquarters of apsrtc, which is ranked as the fourth largest and busiest bus terminals in the country. the city division of apsrtc operates close to 450 buses for an average of 300,000 daily commuting passengers. autonagar bus terminus and city bus port is used for city bus services. the city buses ply in major routes of besant road, eluru road, mg road and to the city outskirts of ibrahimpatnam, kondapalli, mangalagiri, kankipadu, uyyuru, gannavaram, nidamanuru and nunna. in 2016, apsrts has discontinued city services on the brts corridor due to poor response from the commuters. it was built at a reported cost of ₹150 crore (us$19 million), exclusively to be used by city buses has been.
road[edit]
the two major national highways, nh-16 (kolkata–bhubaneshwar-visakhapatnam-vijayawada-guntur-nellore-chennai) and nh-65 (pune-hyderabad-suryapet-vijayawada-machilipatnam), provides road connectivity with other states and major cities. national highway 30 from jagdalpur of chhattisgarh terminates near the city suburb of ibrahimpatnam. the inner ring road connects nh-16 and nh-65 to serve the main purpose of easing traffic congestion.
the seamless commuting in the city is supported by the presence of 16 bridges across the three canals of bandar, eluru, and ryves. m. g. road (bandar road) and eluru road are the major arterial roads of the city, with as many as 90,000 vehicles plying m. g. road itself. the city has a total road length of 1,264.24 km (785.56 mi), used by 678,004 non-transport and 94,937 transport vehicles. the heavy vehicles like lorries are used for freight transport and hold a share of 18% in the country. short distance commuting is served by 27,296 auto rickshaws plying the city roads every day, which include the women-driven 'she autos' as well. the city has a total road length of 1,264.24 km (785.56 mi), covering 1,230.00 km (764.29 mi) of municipal roads, 22.74 km (14.13 mi) of r&b (roads & buildings) department roads, 11.50 km (7.15 mi) of national highways. benz circle is one of the busiest road junctions in the city with an average of 57,000 vehicles crossing daily, the junction has the intersection of two national highways of nh 16 and nh 65.
rail[edit]
vijayawada railway station
vijayawada junction railway station was established in the year 1888. it is one of the busiest stations of indian railways, the busiest railway station in south india, and is classified as a non-suburban grade-2 (nsg-2) station in vijayawada railway division. the station is a junction station for the trains from hyderabad, chennai central, machilipatnam and visakhapatnam junction. a train route connecting vijayawada and hyderabad was laid in 1889. suburban rail services are operated from the railway station to the nearby cities of guntur and tenali. the city houses the headquarters of vijayawada railway division, one of the three railway divisions of south coast railway zone. the station has also a diesel and electric loco sheds which have a capacity of holding 220 locos by both the sheds. the city of vijayawada has several satellite stations such as gannavaram, gunadala, krishna canal, ramavarappadu, kondapalli, rayanapadu, madhura nagar, and nidamanuru.
suburban and high speed rail[edit]
a proposed circular train connectivity would connect vijayawada with neighbouring cities of eluru, guntur, tenali, mangalagiri and the state capital, amaravati.
metro rail system[edit]
a 66km light transit system is proposed to connect the city with amaravathi and its surrounding suburbs.the metro project is implemented by a special purpose vehicle named as, amaravati metro rail corporation. amaravati metro rail corporation has been renamed as andhra pradesh metro rail corporation ltd after the managing director of amrc suggested that it might be appropriate to change the name amrc as apmrc so as to implement the metro projects in other parts of the state and the ruling government obliged.
air[edit]
vijayawada airport
the vijayawada airport at gannavaram provides air connectivity to major metropolitan cities of the country. on 3 may 2017, the airport was upgraded from domestic to international. currently, air india, jet airways and spice jet are operating in the vijayawada airport. international flights started from 4 december 2018 by indigo airlines to singapore. the international flights to singapore stopped after 27 june 2019 because the state government stopped viability gap funding in june 2019. as of june 2019, it registered a domestic passenger movement growth rate of 70.0% with a total of 11 lakh 92 thousand passengers in fy 19. aircraft movement recorded a growth of 65.0%.
