visakhapatnam
Education
education

see also: list of educational institutions in visakhapatnam
st aloysius' anglo-indian high school (sas) established in 1847 in visakhapatnam, andhra pradesh
the primary and secondary school education is imparted by government, aided and private schools, under the school education department of the state. as per the school information report for the academic year 2016–17, urban visakhapatnam had 1,44,268 (western: 144,268) students enrolled in 434 schools. the central board of secondary education, secondary school certificate or the indian certificate of secondary education are the different types of syllabus followed by different schools. the medium of instruction followed by schools are english and telugu. the st. aloysius anglo indian boys high school  is the oldest school in the city to have established in the year 1847. the visakhapatnam district central library is supported by the government and is located at dwaraka nagar.
there are tens of junior colleges under government, andhra pradesh social welfare residential and private undertakings. andhra university is the only autonomous college approved under universities grant commission scheme. mrs. a. v. n. college is one of the oldest educational institution in the city.
the gitam university and the gayatri vidya parishad college of engineering are other technical-education institutions in the city. visakhapatnam is also home to damodaram sanjivayya national law university (dsnlu), which is the national law university for the state of andhra pradesh. dsnlu takes entrance through common law admission test and ranks 15th by order of establishment among the 17 national law universities. the city is due to get india's first packaging park with an indian institute of packaging, iip and bits pilani & birla international school under the aegis of sarala birla academy.
the indian maritime university (imu) was established as a central university by the government of india by an act of parliament (the indian maritime university act 2008). imu is poised to play a role in the development of human resources for the maritime sector. the city also has the national institute of oceanography. the indian institute of management, indian institute of petroleum and energy are the other institutions of national importance.
