visakhapatnam
Transport
transport

main article: transport in visakhapatnam
visakhapatnam metro express highway service at kurmanapalem
visakhapatnam railway station
the city commuters prefer city buses and auto rickshaws as the primary mode of transport, followed by two-wheelers and cars. road and rail are preferred for long-distance commuting and are supported by dwaraka bus station and visakhapatnam railway station respectively. it also has sea and air travel infrastructure such as, visakhapatnam port and visakhapatnam airport.
the apsrtc operates city, district and inter-state bus services from dwaraka bus station. over 600 city buses operate over 150 routes, in addition to bus rapid transit system in two corridors of pendurthi and simhachalam. a planned integrated bus terminal complex would be built at maddilapalem. apart from buses, there are about 25,000 auto rickshaws plying on the city roads which provide intermediate public transport.
visakhapatnam is the headquarters of south coast railway zone of indian railways. visakhapatnam railway station is as an a1 station with the highest gross revenue in the waltair railway division. it serves an average of 20,000–25,000 passengers daily and may rise up to 40,000 during festivals. it has the country's largest diesel locomotive shed with a capacity of 206. visakhapatnam metro is a planned metro rail project.
visakhapatnam airport terminal
as of 2013, the percentage of transport mode shares in the city are, 18% buses, 9% autos, 15% two wheelers, 2% cars and 55% non-motorised transport (bicycles and pedestrians). the total road network accounts for a total length of 2,007.10 km (1,247.15 mi). nh16, a major highway and a part of the golden quadrilateral system bypasses the city.
visakhapatnam airport had served a total of 2,815,205 passengers in 2018, an increase of 16.8% from the previous year. it handled a total of 23,264 aircraft during that year.
visakhapatnam port is one of 13 major ports in india and the only major port of andhra pradesh. it is india's second-largest port by volume of cargo handled. it is located on the east coast of india and is located midway between the chennai and kolkata ports. cruise shipping is operational between visakhapatnam and andaman and nicobar islands.
