visakhapatnam
Administration
administration

main article: administration of visakhapatnam
greater visakhapatnam municipal corporation (gvmc) is the civic body that oversees the civic needs of the city.  one of the earliest municipalities in this area, the vizag (visakhapatnam) municipality was set up in 1858 to fulfil the basic infrastructural needs of the people. it was converted into a municipal corporation in 1979. greater visakhapatnam municipal corporation came into existence on 21 november 2005 after the release of g.o by govt of andhra pradesh.
it has a jurisdictional area of 681.96 km (263.31 sq mi), which includes the merged municipalities of gajuwaka, anakapalle and bheemunipatnam. although as per the 2011 census, it is 513.61 km (198.31 sq mi) mentioned in the district town amenities hand book of andhra pradesh, portraying a rise in area covered by the municipal corporation in these years
the municipal corporation of vishakapatnam is governed by three acts. first is the state municipal act, the andhra pradesh municipalities act 1965, andhra pradesh municipal corporations 1994 act, as well as an act specific to vishakapatnam municipal corporation act 1979.
the city is divided into 9 zones, in a recent agglomeration of five bheemili villages with a population of 19,000 into the gvmc jurisdiction the number of wards has increased to 98.
municipal elections and civic government officials
the previous municipal elections were held in 2007. after a larger gap of 13 years the elections were scheduled to happen on 23 march 2020. the results of the latest municipal elections for 145 municipalities and 10 municipal corporations across andhra pradesh were held on march 30 and the results were announced on monday. of the 92 municipalities in seemandhra, tdp won 65 municipalities and ysr congress nineteen. of the seven municipal corporations, tdp bagged five and ysr congress two.
the city governance structure of gvmc consists of an elected wing headed by the mayor and administrative wing headed by the administrative commissioner,  4 additional commissioners, and 8 zonal commissioners. mayor elections were planned to be carried out in the month of march, 2020 but details are yet to be declared. the present municipal commissioner of the city is g srijana. the municipal commissioner looks after the administration of the municipal corporation.
the executive wing has departments for engineering, public health, revenue, town planning, horticulture, education, finance, general administration, projects, it e governance and urban community development.
the organisational structure of the gvmc includes standing committees, ward committees and special committees, the corporation wards committees must be of not less than ten wards, special committees are appointed by the corporation out of their own body, and a standing committee consisting of chairpersons from all wards.
municipal budget
the gvmc estimated a budget of ₹4,171 crore (us$520 million) for the financial year 2020–21. it shows an increase of ₹337 crore (equivalent to ₹356 crore or us$45 million in 2020) compared to the last budget for 2019–20. the revenue department of gvmc generates its revenue by levying of property tax, vacant land tax and it is collection and dealing with remunerative enterprises, water charges etc.
masterplan
in 2019, the planning wing of the visakhapatnam metropolitan region development authority (vmrda) started preparing a 'perspective plan 2051' which is a 30-year strategic plan, apart from another 'master plan 2041'. the 'perspective plan' is expected to include provisions for resource conservation, regional growth, economic growth and transportation strategies, coastal zone regulations, disaster management strategies, population forecast and distribution, broad structure plan, and implementation plan.
the 'master plan' proposes growth strategy with transit-oriented development strategies, expansion of satellite towns such as vizianagaram, anakapalli, bheemili, etc., theme-based economic nodes along the proposed metro-rail corridor, bus-based public transport, tourism destination development, a comprehensive rural agenda and resilient city planning.
yet another proposal includes a transit corridor connecting bhogapuram airport with the existing business centres of the city and the industrial clusters in atchutapuram under visakhapatnam-chennai industrial corridor (vcic).
district administration
the district area is 11,161 km (4,309 sq mi). the sub-division is divided into mandals. visakhapatnam district consists of 43 mandals, each headed by a tahsildar. it also has one municipal corporation and two municipalities. there are four revenue divisions in the district. a revenue division is headed by revenue divisional officer in the rank  of sub–collector in the cadre of i.a.s. or a deputy collector. he is the sub divisional magistrate having jurisdiction over his division.
law and order
law and order in the city is dealt by visakhapatnam city police, equipped with a police commissionerate with commissioner of police as the head and with assisted by three deputy commissioners for different zones. the current city police commissioner is mr. manish kumar sinha. visakhapatnam metropolitan region development authority (vmrda) is an urban planning agency that covers the gvmc and its suburbs covering, two corporations, one municipality, one nagar panchayat and 895 villages from two districts of visakhapatnam and vizianagaram. the expanded area of the city, visakhapatnam metropolitan region extends to 4,873 km (1,881 sq mi) with a population of 50,18,000 (western: 5,018,000) and is under the administration of visakhapatnam metropolitan region development authority.
the district & sessions court are located in vishakapatnam city and it also includes family courts.
legislative assembly

this section may require cleanup to meet wikipedia's quality standards. the specific problem is: the information provided seems outdated and unorganised. please help improve this section if you can. (march 2021) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
the city has eight assembly constituencies in its limits. in the legislative elections mr. m srinivasa rao of ysrcp was elected to the assembly from bhimli constituency  mr. ganesh kumar of tdp was elected to the assembly from visakhapatnam south segment in 2014 and 2019 polls. for vizag east mr. ramakrishna babu velgapudi was elected. for vizag; vizag north ganta srinivasa rao and for vizag west p.g.v.r naidu was elected. for gajuwaka mr. t nagireddy was elected; for pendurthi mr. a adeep raj was elected and for anakapalle constituency mr. g amarnath was elected.  out of these eight constituencies anakapalli and pendurthi fall under anakapalli lok sabha constituency. the current lok sabha elective vishakhapatnam is mr. m. v. v. satyanarayana. while four mlas are from the tdp party,remaining four are from the ysrcp. the incumbent mp is from ysrcp.
