visakhapatnam
Cityscape
cityscape
visakhapatanam city skyline as seen from kailasagiri
ins kursura (s20)
city scape from beach road near tenneti park
neighbourhoods

see also: list of neighbourhoods in visakhapatnam
over the years, visakhapatnam has turned from a fishing village into a commercial city with busy streets. most notable areas of the city include urban areas like allipuram, arilova, asilmetta, dwaraka nagar, gajuwaka, gopalapatnam, jagadamba centre, lawsons bay colony, maddilapalem, madhurawada, mvp colony, rushikonda, seethammadhara, siripuram and semi-rural suburbs such as anakapalle, bheemunipatnam, duvvada, parawada, pendurthi and thagarapuvalasa .
landmarks
visakhapatnam is one of the main tourism destinations in the state of andhra pradesh. the city is known for its beaches, caves and the eastern ghats as well as wildlife sanctuaries. about 30% of the city is covered with greenery.
major landmarks in the city include dolphin's nose, lighthouse, kailasagiri, beach road, vmrda park, visakha museum and matsyadarsini (an aquarium). the ins kursura submarine museum and anti-submarine warfare (asw) aircraft tu 142 aircraft museum opposite to each other is the only one of its kind in the world, conceptualising the hunted and hunter of the wars. indira gandhi zoological park in the city has variety of wildlife species. erra matti dibbalu (red sand dunes) are situated between visakhapatnam and bheemunipatnam are one of the geo-heritage sites in the country. this tourist spot is now protected and preserved as a heritage site. dr. ramanaidu film studio in 33 acres space off the visakha-bhimili beach road is one of the film shootings destination. telugu samskruthika niketanam on atop kailasagiri was developed by world telugu federation and visakhapatnam urban development authority, adding one more feather to its cap, visakhapatnam is home to india's tallest musical fountain opened in the vuda city central park. oscillating vertically at 360 degrees, the fountain dances to the tune of digital music in different colours.
beaches along the coastline of the bay of bengal include rk beach, rushikonda beach and mangamaripeta beach. others are yarada, bheemili, lawson's bay, tenneti, sagar nagar, thotlakonda and gangavaram beaches. borra caves are caves discovered by british geologist william king in 1807. tyda (an eco tourism project), kambalakonda wildlife sanctuary under andhra pradesh forest department are wildlife conservation sites near the city.
