vizianagaram
History[edit]
history[edit]
this section may require copy editing.  (february 2022) (learn how and when to remove this template message)
coat of arms of the vizianagaram kingdom
vizianagaram was ruled by different hindu emperors of kalinga and it was an integral part of kalinga. the area including srikakulam in the north was under the domain of eastern chalukyas of vengi during the rule of kubja vishnuvardhana (624–641) for short period of time. during this rule the vengi kingdom had expanded from srikakulam in the north to nellore in the south. they patronised telugu. the area was under the rule of krishna deva raya of vijayanagara empire too. after a brief rule from golconda, the rule of nizam state of hyderabad followed. nizams ruled for the period 1707 to 1753. srikakulam to the immediate north was the headquarters for revenue collection of rajahmundry, eluru,  kondapalli as well as srikakulam district. the french defeated and ended the rule of nizam in 1753, all these districts were thereafter part of french india in 1753. however french imperialists too could not hold their sway over here for a long time, and were soon driven out from here by british imperialists, during 1756  in  anglo-french wars. thereafter the area was soon a part of british – northern circars
an important event in the history of the district which occurred at about this time is the war between the rajas of vizianagaram and bobbili, popularly known as bobbili yuddam. the war was fought between the maharaja of vizianagaram and the rajah of bobbili on 24 january 1757.  after 1757 war, from bobbili raja's family relative and who is from ganganapally, shri ravu venkata rayanym dora garu formed a separate small jameen in early 18th century by including villages of pinpenki, badangi, anavaram and kusumur ruled. now his family is residing in pinapenki gadhaba valasa. as they are very well known in the area, now their family members started  "rvr foundation" on the name of shri ravu vittal rao dora garu to help poor children founder & president "shri ravu venkata aditya mohan", he is conducting  child development activities and giving financial / moral support.
rulers of this princely state belong to the pusapati family. the village pooshpadu in nandigama taluq was built by amala raju. the village later came to be known as pusapadu, and the rajus living there came to be known as pusapatis.
excavations at this town revealed copper coins belonging to the remains of 900 b.c. (kalinga period).
