warangal
History[edit]
history[edit]

main article: kakatiya dynasty
warangal years agosculptures at warangal fortkakatiyas well at warangal
warangal was the ancient capital of kakatiya dynasty. it was ruled by many kings such as beta raja i, prola raja i, beta raja ii, prola raja ii, rudradeva, mahadeva, ganapathideva, prataparudra and rani rudrama devi who is the only woman to rule over telugu region. beta raja i is the founder of kakatiya dynasty and ruled the kingdom for 30 years and was succeeded by his son prola raja i who shifted his capital to hanamkonda.
during the rule of ganapathideva, the capital was shifted from hanamkonda to warangal. kakatiya period inscriptions praised warangal as best city within all of telugu region up to shores of the ocean. the kakatiyas left many monuments, including an impressive fortress, four massive stone gateways, the swayambhu temple dedicated to shiva, and the ramappa temple situated near ramappa lake. the cultural and administrative distinction of the kakatiyas was mentioned by marco polo. after the defeat of prataparudra ii, the musunuri nayaks united 72 nayak chieftains and captured warangal from delhi sultanate and ruled for fifty years. after the demise of the nayaks, warangal was part of the bahmani sultanate and then the sultanate of golconda.
the mughal emperor aurangzeb conquered golconda in 1687, and it remained part of the mughal empire until the southern provinces of the empire split away to become the state of hyderabad in 1724, which included the telangana region and some parts of maharashtra and karnataka. hyderabad was annexed to india in 1948, and became an indian state called as hyderabad state. in 1956 hyderabad state was partitioned as part of the states reorganisation act, and telangana, the telugu-speaking region of hyderabad state, which includes warangal, became part of andhra pradesh. after the telangana movement, telangana state was formed on 2 june 2014, warangal became part of telangana state.
