warangal
Government and politics[edit]
government and politics[edit]
civic administration[edit]

main article: greater warangal municipal corporation
greater warangal municipal corporation
greater warangal municipal corporation is the civic body of the city, which oversees the civic needs. established in 1899, it is one of the oldest urban local bodies in india. city planning is governed by the kakatiya urban development authority (kuda), constituted in 1982 by the local government for the planning, development and management of the kakatiya urban development area. it has its jurisdictional area spread over 1,805 km (697 sq mi), covering 19 mandals, 181 villages in the three districts of warangal district, hanamkonda and jangaon. as of 2016, the corporation has bagged a total of eleven awards in various categories, such as conservation, sanitation, heritage, etc. for electoral purpose, the city is divided into 58 electoral wards, of which 50% are reserved for women. a total of thirty seats are reserved for bc's (19), sc's (9) and st's (2) respectively.
in october 2012, the corporation conducted clean cities championship, which invited professionals from 57 municipalities across the state for effective waste management and was won by khammam municipal corporation. following the event, warangal became the first city in india to achieve 100% door-to-door msw collection. about 70% of households started practicing two-bin msw segregation into wet and dry waste. 420 cement bins and 128 dumpsters were removed from locations across warangal making it a no dump city. gwmc was able to reduce the msw going to landfill by 30% to 40%. and the dumpyard with significantly reduced load is, in phases, being converted into a nature park with vermicomposting sheds.
law and order[edit]
police patrol vehicle in warangal
the urban police district, which is responsible for maintaining law and order in city and agglomerated areas around warangal was converted into a police commissionerate by the state government in 2015. inspector general will be working as police commissioner who is also given magisterial powers. there are around 71 police stations present under warangal police commissionerate.
healthcare[edit]
there are hospitals in the city for health care. the mahatma gandhi memorial hospital is the largest hospital in the city, serving the patients from the adilabad, khammam and karimnagar.
