yamunanagar
Geography[edit]
geography[edit]
yamuna nagar has the river yamuna (its namesake) running through the district, which forms the eastern boundary with the neighbouring saharanpur district. this boundary is also a state boundary, as saharanpur is in the state of uttar pradesh. the district also separates the yamuna system from the satluj river system.
from yamuna nagar, yamuna river enters plain area for the first time. the historical river saraswati also originates from adi badri, also located in the district. towards its northern edge is a sub-mountainous region, which has more forest cover and many streams; it is the area where the river yamuna flows out of the hills and into the plains. the northern boundary is also an interstate boundary with the state of himachal pradesh to the north. sirmour in himachal is the district to its north with the towns of nahan and paonta sahib close to the boundary with yamunanagar.
climate[edit]
record high – 45.5 degrees  record low – -0.5 degrees  record rainfall (24 hours) – 383mm in jagadhri on 14 july 2016 .
average rainfall of monsoon – 891 mm. chhachhrauli and bilaspur tehsils are the rainiest tehsils in haryana. they are known as "the cherapunjjis of haryana". loo blows generally between 15 may to 20 june. fog is common in december, january and february.
rivers[edit]
the western yamuna canal of the river yamuna flows on one side of the city. this canal serves the irrigation needs of the farmers. the canal has century-old path ways, known locally as pattris, on both sides which serve as connecting routes between villages even today and also help the irrigation department to maintain the canal and serve as a perfect scenic walk—with water on one side and green lush farms on other. the yamuna river marks the boundary of the district with the state of uttar pradesh, which borders the city on the eastern side. the neighbouring city is saharanpur in the state of uttar pradesh. , the district borders the state of himachal pradesh, sirmaur being the district and the towns of nahan and paonta sahib being the towns nearby. tajewala headworks—from where the yamuna canal is diverted—also lies north of the city. jagadhri is an adjoining town famous for its industrial brass sheet and stainless steel industry.
